ab0t                                                          A. Bot, Ed.
Request for Comments: ACP/EXT-9                                      ab0t.com
Updates: ACP/1                                                     July 2026
Category: Extension Proposal                                       ISSN: n/a


        ACP Extension Proposal 9: Presence and Awareness (Ephemeral
                       Per-Actor State with TTL Expiry)


Abstract

   This document is an EXTENSION PROPOSAL for the Agent Coordination
   Protocol, Version 1 (ACP/1).  It specifies one additive,
   backward-compatible feature: AWARENESS -- a per-space, per-actor,
   EPHEMERAL state store ("pod-b's cursor is on node ARR right now",
   "pod-a is typing", "who is live on this board") with TTL-based
   expiry, a snapshot read, and a live delta stream.

   ACP/1's event log (Section 8 of ACP/1) is append-only, durable, and
   totally ordered -- exactly right for facts, and exactly wrong for
   awareness.  Awareness data is high-frequency, per-actor,
   self-superseding, and worthless once stale: recording every cursor
   move as a durable event bloats the one log every agent replays and
   creates compaction work for state nobody will ever read back.  ACP/1
   does ship a COARSE presence primitive (the heartbeat/roster of
   POST /v1/agents/beat and GET /v1/agents); this extension is its
   fine-grained, real-time, self-expiring generalization.

   The extension adds one resource, /v1/awareness: POST sets the
   caller's own awareness state (with a TTL), GET returns a snapshot of
   all live entries, and GET with follow=true streams awareness deltas
   (join, update, leave/expire).  Awareness entries are NEVER written
   to the durable event log, never replicated through the consensus
   log, and never carried by a snapshot: they are a deliberately
   BEST-EFFORT, lossy-on-crash tier beside ACP/1's durable one.  The
   feature is negotiated by a new capability string, "awareness".  None
   of this changes the wire version "acp/1": the endpoints are new, a
   daemon that does not implement this extension answers them 404, and
   a daemon or client that does not implement this extension
   interoperates unchanged with one that does.

Status of This Memo

   This is a PROPOSAL, not yet part of the normative ACP/1
   specification (rfc/acp-1.txt).  It is published for review by
   implementers and for the protocol owner's approval.  The extension
   number EXT-9 is PROVISIONAL; the protocol owner assigns final
   numbers on acceptance.  If accepted, its endpoints and types fold
   into a future "acp/1.1" capability set; the base protocol version
   string remains "acp/1" and the feature is advertised via Section 5.
   Distribution is unlimited.

   Revision note (26 July 2026): the protocol owner has APPROVED this
   extension for implementation; it is NOT yet implemented.  This
   revision, produced after a July 2026 production incident
   (Section 1.4) and a supporting research review of industry
   awareness protocols (the Yjs awareness protocol, Liveblocks
   presence), adds: the incident motivation (Section 1.4), the
   OPTIONAL per-actor SESSION discriminator for multi-connection
   clients (Sections 2, 4), the document-field convention
   (Section 4.2), and the interaction rules with EXT-5 documents and
   EXT-11 undo/redo (Section 4.8).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 ab0t.  Licensed under the MIT License, the same
   license as the reference implementation and the base specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Motivation
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals
   4.  The Awareness Store
   5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility
   6.  Wire API Additions
   7.  Determinism and High Availability
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  Rollout Plan
   10. Open Questions
   Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types
   Appendix B.  New Error Conditions
   Appendix C.  Worked Examples
   Authors' Addresses


1.  Introduction and Motivation

   ACP/1 gives a space exactly one shared-state mechanism with delivery
   guarantees: the per-space, append-only, totally-ordered event log
   (ACP/1 Section 8), from which every agent derives durable shared
   state.  Alongside it, ACP/1 offers a COARSE presence facility:
   agents POST /v1/agents/beat periodically and read the roster from
   GET /v1/agents ("which agents have been seen recently, on which
   host, with what status").

   Between those two lies a gap that every live multi-editor surface
   falls into.  A collaborative board backed by the structured CRDT of
   ACP/EXT-5, a co-edited text document (ACP/1 Section 12), or simply
   "who is looking at this workspace right now" all need AWARENESS:
   which actors are live, where their cursors and selections are, what
   they are doing this second.  Four concrete problems motivate this
   extension:

   1.1.  Awareness abuses the durable log.

      The only in-protocol way to tell peers "my cursor moved" today is
      to append an event.  Cursor movement is emitted many times per
      second per actor, is superseded by the next movement, and has NO
      value after a few seconds -- yet every such event would be
      fsync'd, sequenced, replicated, replayed by every follower, and
      chased by compaction (ACP/1 Section 8.5) forever after.  The log
      is monotone and durable BY DESIGN; awareness is the one class of
      state that design actively harms.

   1.2.  Hand-rolled presence out of band.

      Absent a protocol primitive, consumers build their own: a
      downstream engine that adopted ACP was found to have implemented
      its own homegrown presence subsystem beside it.  Every such
      side-build re-solves expiry, fan-out, and join/leave edges, and
      none of it interoperates.

   1.3.  The existing heartbeat is too coarse.

      POST /v1/agents/beat carries (harness, host, status) at a
      many-second cadence -- a ROSTER, not awareness.  It cannot say
      "cursor on node n7 of doc boards/q3", cannot expire promptly
      enough for an editing surface, and has no delta stream a renderer
      can follow.  The shape is right (per-actor, self-superseding,
      server-timestamped); the granularity, payload, and delivery are
      not.

   1.4.  The anti-pattern in production (July 2026).

      This gap is not hypothetical.  In July 2026 a production
      deployment was taken down by exactly this failure: a
      collaborative-board client, having no ephemeral primitive to
      use, wrote its presence (cursor position, heartbeat timestamp,
      activity status) into a durable structured-CRDT document
      (EXT-5) as ordinary ops.  The document's op log grew to
      ~60,000 ops (18.7 MB) -- 99.7% of them presence writes -- and,
      because session-scoped presence keys are LIVE state from the
      CRDT's point of view, compaction could not reclaim them (1,940
      compaction epochs left the log the same size).  Under normal
      realtime polling the write path then collapsed: multi-minute
      tail latencies, edge timeouts, and a retry storm.  Every mature
      realtime-collaboration stack keeps awareness on a separate,
      TTL-expiring, broadcast channel for this reason -- the Yjs
      awareness protocol (a distinct sub-protocol with a mandatory
      30-second expiry) and Liveblocks (whose API split between
      ephemeral Presence and durable Storage makes the mistake
      inexpressible) are the reference designs.  This extension is
      that channel for ACP; Section 4.8 makes the boundary normative.

   This extension closes the gap with the smallest additive surface: a
   per-space awareness store -- actor -> {state, expiry} -- written by
   its owner only, expiring on a short TTL, readable as a snapshot, and
   streamable as deltas.  It is the first inhabitant of an explicitly
   EPHEMERAL tier beside ACP/1's durable one, and it is deliberately
   kept OUT of the event log, out of the replicated state machine, and
   out of snapshots.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119]
   [RFC8174].

   This document uses the architecture, transport, authentication,
   role, space, event, and presence definitions of ACP/1 without
   restating them; section references of the form "ACP/1 Section N"
   point into rfc/acp-1.txt, and "EXT-N Section M" into the
   corresponding extension memo.

   AWARENESS ENTRY:  The single ephemeral record the store holds for
      one (actor, session) in one space:
      { actor, session, state, ttl, expires, updated }.
      An actor has AT MOST one entry per (space, session); a new
      write to the same (actor, session) replaces the previous entry
      wholesale.

   SESSION:  An OPTIONAL, client-chosen, short opaque discriminator
      (e.g. a browser-tab or connection id) that lets one
      authenticated actor hold several simultaneous awareness entries
      (multi-tab, multi-window).  Defaults to the empty string (one
      entry per actor).  Identity and authority always remain the
      token-derived ACTOR; the session is a display-level
      discriminator, never an identity.  Sessions are exactly the
      state whose durable storage caused the July 2026 incident
      (Section 1.4): abandoned per-session keys accumulated forever
      in a document, whereas here they simply TTL-expire.

   AWARENESS STATE:  The client-supplied JSON object inside an entry
      (cursor position, selection, status, display name, ...).  The
      protocol treats it as opaque, bounded-size JSON.

   TTL:  The entry's time-to-live.  An entry not refreshed within its
      TTL EXPIRES: it disappears from snapshots and produces a "leave"
      delta, exactly as if the actor had departed.

   EPHEMERAL TIER:  State that is intentionally NOT durable, NOT
      totally ordered, and NOT replicated through the consensus log;
      lost on daemon restart and re-established by clients' next
      writes.  Awareness is the first protocol feature in this tier.

   DELTA:  One change notification on the awareness stream: an actor
      joined (first write), updated (subsequent write), or left
      (explicit clear or TTL expiry).

3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals

   3.1.  Ephemeral means ephemeral (the invariant).

      Awareness entries MUST NOT be written to the event log, MUST NOT
      be assigned seq values, MUST NOT be carried by log compaction
      snapshots or cluster snapshots, and MUST NOT be replicated as
      state-machine commands (Section 7).  An implementation MUST keep
      the awareness store in volatile memory (or equivalent); its loss
      on restart is CORRECT behavior, repaired by clients' next
      heartbeats.  This is the load-bearing invariant of the extension:
      the moment awareness leaks into the durable log, this extension
      has failed at its one job.

   3.2.  Per-actor last-writer-wins, no merge.

      An actor writes ONLY its own entries (the authority derives the
      actor from the token, ACP/1 Section 5.2, and ignores any
      client-supplied identity; the OPTIONAL session discriminator
      subdivides an actor's entries but never crosses actors).
      Because each (actor, session) entry has exactly one writer,
      there is nothing to merge: the newest write to that entry
      replaces it wholesale.  Awareness is a keyed register per
      (actor, session), not a CRDT.  This matches the industry
      reference design (the Yjs awareness protocol: a client "MUST
      only modify its own entry").

   3.3.  Best-effort delivery, honestly stated.

      Awareness is advisory display state.  Delivery is best-effort:
      a delta MAY be lost on daemon restart, leader change, or stream
      reconnect, and the protocol's repair mechanism is simply the next
      heartbeat (a full re-send of the actor's state).  Clients MUST
      treat awareness as lossy and MUST NOT build correctness-bearing
      logic (locking, ordering, claiming) on it -- ACP/1 leases
      (Section 10) and the event log exist for that.  A reconnecting
      follower re-primes from the snapshot read (Section 4.3).

   3.4.  Additive and negotiated, never breaking.

      All endpoints are NEW paths under /v1/awareness; no existing
      endpoint or type changes.  A daemon that does not implement this
      extension answers them 404, and clients discover support via the
      capability list (Section 5).  The protocol version string stays
      "acp/1".  The existing coarse heartbeat/roster (POST
      /v1/agents/beat, GET /v1/agents) is UNCHANGED and remains the
      right tool for "is this agent alive"; awareness neither replaces
      nor deprecates it.

   3.5.  Non-goals.

      This extension does NOT add: durable presence history ("who was
      here yesterday" -- append an event if that is wanted); awareness
      ACROSS spaces (the space remains the boundary, ACP/1 Section 7);
      guaranteed or ordered delivery of awareness deltas; a general
      gossip/relay fabric (a future extension MAY generalize the
      ephemeral tier; Section 10); server-side interpretation of the
      state object (cursor schemas are a client concern -- the protocol
      carries opaque JSON); awareness-derived authorization of any
      kind; or undo of awareness (awareness is not a document: it
      forms no EXT-11 op groups and Ctrl-Z never reverts a cursor --
      Section 4.8).

4.  The Awareness Store

   4.1.  The store.

      Per space, the authority keeps a volatile map

         (actor, session) -> AwarenessEntry
             { actor, session, state, ttl, expires, updated }

      keyed by the authenticated actor id plus the client-chosen
      session discriminator (default "").  The map is bounded by the
      number of live agents in the space times the per-actor session
      bound (Section 4.2); entries leave it by explicit clear or TTL
      expiry.  The store is per-space: awareness MUST never be
      visible across spaces (ACP/1 Section 7).

   4.2.  Setting awareness: POST /v1/awareness.

      Request body:

         { "state": <object>, "ttl_sec": <int>?, "session": <string>? }

      The authority MUST set the entry's actor to the authenticated
      identity (never from a client-supplied field, ACP/1 Section 5.2)
      and MUST replace that (actor, session) entry wholesale (no
      server-side merging of state objects).  "updated" and "expires"
      are stamped from the serving node's clock.

      "session" is OPTIONAL (default "" -- one entry per actor): a
      short opaque discriminator that lets one actor maintain several
      concurrent entries (multi-tab, multi-connection).  A daemon
      MUST bound its length (RECOMMENDED maximum 64 bytes, 400
      beyond) and SHOULD bound live sessions per actor (RECOMMENDED
      8), evicting the stalest entry (emitting its "leave" delta)
      when the bound is exceeded.

      ttl_sec is OPTIONAL; the RECOMMENDED default is 30 seconds --
      deliberately matching the proven convention of the Yjs
      awareness protocol (30-second expiry, re-broadcast at least
      every 15 seconds); Liveblocks' presence API likewise makes the
      TTL explicit.  A daemon SHOULD enforce a maximum TTL
      (RECOMMENDED 300 seconds) and MUST reject a non-positive or
      over-maximum ttl_sec with 400.  A daemon MUST bound the encoded
      size of "state" (RECOMMENDED maximum 16 KiB) and reject an
      oversized state with 400; awareness is display state, not a
      data channel.

      When the awareness pertains to one document of a multi-document
      space, the state object SHOULD carry a "doc" field naming it,
      so consumers can filter client-side until a server-side filter
      exists (Section 10).

      A write with "state": null (or an empty object and ttl_sec 0)
      is an EXPLICIT LEAVE: the authority MUST drop that
      (actor, session) entry and emit a "leave" delta.  Clients
      SHOULD send an explicit leave on orderly shutdown rather than
      letting the TTL lapse.

      The response is the stored entry (Appendix A).  Awareness writes
      MUST count against the sender's rate limit (ACP/1 Section 5.4);
      clients SHOULD throttle to a few writes per second and coalesce
      rapid cursor movement and status flips client-side (cursor
      sampling on the order of 30-60 ms, not per input event).

   4.3.  Snapshot: GET /v1/awareness.

      Returns the live entries of the caller's space:

         { "entries": [ AwarenessEntry, ... ] }

      An entry whose expiry has passed MUST NOT appear.  The snapshot
      is the re-priming read: a client that (re)connects fetches it
      once, then follows deltas (Section 4.4).  Reading awareness
      requires only the "reader" role (ACP/1 Section 5.3).

   4.4.  Live deltas: GET /v1/awareness?follow=true.

      A streaming response (application/x-ndjson, one JSON object per
      line, matching the event-follow transport of ACP/1 Section 8.4)
      of awareness deltas:

         { "type": "join"|"update"|"leave", "entry": AwarenessEntry }

      "join" is emitted when an (actor, session) with no live entry
      writes one; "update" when an existing entry is replaced;
      "leave" when an entry is explicitly cleared OR expires (the
      "entry" of a leave MAY carry only the actor and session).  The
      stream SHOULD begin with a synthetic "join" for every
      currently-live entry, so a follower needs no separate snapshot
      request; clients MUST nonetheless tolerate receiving deltas for
      entries they have not seen join (best-effort delivery,
      Section 3.3).

      Deltas carry NO seq and NO ordering guarantee beyond per-entry
      write order as observed by the serving node.  There is no replay
      cursor: on reconnect a client simply re-primes (Section 4.3 or
      the synthetic joins) and continues.

   4.5.  TTL expiry.

      The authority MUST expire an entry no later than a bounded
      interval after its "expires" instant (a periodic sweep with a
      RECOMMENDED period of at most 5 seconds is sufficient) and MUST
      emit a "leave" delta on expiry.  Expiry uses the serving node's
      own clock; because awareness is not replicated state, modest
      cross-node skew is acceptable (Section 7).  Clients keep their
      entry alive by re-POSTing state at an interval comfortably below
      the TTL (RECOMMENDED: TTL/3).

   4.6.  Relationship to the ACP/1 heartbeat.

      POST /v1/agents/beat answers "which agents exist and are alive"
      at roster granularity; /v1/awareness answers "what is each live
      actor doing right now" at editing granularity.  A daemon MAY
      internally refresh an agent's roster liveness when it receives an
      awareness write from it, but MUST NOT do the converse (a beat
      does not create or refresh an awareness entry -- the beat carries
      no state).

   4.7.  Backward compatibility.

      A daemon that does not implement this extension answers every
      /v1/awareness request 404.  A conformant client MUST check for
      the "awareness" capability (Section 5) before use, and when it is
      absent MUST degrade explicitly (no cursors shown) rather than
      polling a 404 endpoint.  Nothing else in ACP/1 changes.

   4.8.  Relationship to the structured CRDT and undo (EXT-5, EXT-11).

      Awareness is the designated home for the class of state that
      does not belong in a durable EXT-5 document: cursors,
      selections, heartbeats, liveness, transient activity status.
      The boundary is normative in both directions:

      o  Awareness never touches a document.  Awareness writes form
         no EXT-5 ops and no EXT-11 op groups, appear in no document
         materialization or op log, and are invisible to compaction
         and undo.  (This restates Section 3.1 from the document
         side.)

      o  Documents SHOULD NOT carry awareness.  Once a daemon
         advertises "awareness", clients SHOULD NOT store
         per-heartbeat or per-cursor state in an EXT-5 document.
         Beyond the unbounded-growth and write-path collapse of
         Section 1.4, presence stored in a document poisons EXT-11
         undo BY CONSTRUCTION: every heartbeat push becomes an op
         group on the actor's undo stack, so a bounded stack (EXT-11
         Section 8.3, RECOMMENDED depth 100) is fully displaced by
         presence groups within seconds at heartbeat cadence -- undo
         then reverts a cursor twitch instead of the user's last real
         edit.  Keeping awareness here is what keeps EXT-11 undo
         stacks meaningful.

      o  The one legitimate durable residue is a SINGLE small
         summary, such as a "last seen" timestamp per actor, written
         at a coarse cadence (minutes, not heartbeats) as an ordinary
         document or event write.  A client wanting durable presence
         HISTORY appends events (ACP/1 Section 8); it does not stream
         heartbeats into a CRDT.

5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility

   This extension adds a capability string to the ACP/1 introspection
   endpoints, per the shared convention of EXT-1 Section 7:

      GET /v1/healthz (and/or GET /v1/stats) responses gain:

         "protocol": "acp/1",
         "capabilities": [ "awareness", ... ]

      A daemon advertising "awareness" SHOULD also advertise its
      bounds so clients can size and pace their writes:

         "limits": { "awareness_max_state_bytes": 16384,
                     "awareness_default_ttl_sec": 30,
                     "awareness_max_ttl_sec": 300 }

   A daemon MUST advertise "awareness" only when it implements all of
   Section 4 (set, snapshot, follow stream, TTL expiry with leave
   deltas).  A client MUST treat the ABSENCE of "awareness" as "not
   supported" and disable its awareness features explicitly.

6.  Wire API Additions

   Summary (full detail in Section 4; types in Appendix A):

      New:
         POST /v1/awareness             ; set/replace my entry (writer
                                        ;   or reader -- see Section 8.2)
         GET  /v1/awareness             ; snapshot of live entries
         GET  /v1/awareness?follow=true ; NDJSON delta stream

      Modified:
         GET /v1/healthz, /v1/stats     + "awareness" capability and
                                          OPTIONAL "limits" hints

   All endpoints follow ACP/1 Section 6 conventions: JSON bodies, the
   standard headers (X-ACP-Agent, X-ACP-Protocol, X-ACP-Space), bearer
   auth (ACP/1 Section 5), and the standard error model (Appendix B of
   ACP/1 plus Appendix B here).  The follow stream uses
   application/x-ndjson exactly like the event stream (ACP/1
   Section 8.4).  Idempotency-Key is NOT meaningful here (a re-sent
   awareness write is naturally idempotent -- it re-asserts the same
   state) and MAY be ignored on these endpoints.

7.  Determinism and High Availability

   ACP/1 Section 17 requires the replicated state machine to be
   deterministic: applying the same ordered command stream MUST yield
   byte-identical state on every node.  Awareness satisfies this by
   staying OUT of the state machine entirely:

      o  Awareness writes MUST NOT be proposed as consensus commands,
         MUST NOT appear in the replicated log, and awareness state
         MUST NOT be included in snapshots.  This is forced by the data
         itself: awareness is high-churn (it would flood the log) and
         expires by wall clock (which the deterministic apply path
         forbids, ACP/1 Section 17).

      o  In a cluster, the RECOMMENDED v1 topology is LEADER-SERVED
         awareness: clients' awareness writes are forwarded to the
         leader exactly like other writes, the leader holds the one
         authoritative volatile map and serves the snapshot and delta
         streams; a follower receiving an awareness request MAY proxy
         it to the leader (or redirect, per the deployment's existing
         write-forwarding convention).  This gives every editor one
         consistent view at the cost of leader fan-out -- acceptable at
         the tens-of-editors scale this extension targets.  A relay or
         gossip tier that spreads awareness fan-out across nodes is an
         explicit non-goal here and a candidate future extension
         (Section 10).

      o  On leader change or daemon restart the awareness map MAY be
         lost wholesale.  This is specified, correct behavior: clients
         re-send state on their next heartbeat (Section 4.5) and the
         map rebuilds within one TTL.  Implementations MUST NOT attempt
         to "recover" awareness from any durable record, because none
         may exist (Section 3.1).

      o  TTL expiry runs against the serving node's own clock.  Since
         awareness is never replicated state, per-node expiry cannot
         diverge replicated state; a few hundred milliseconds of skew
         in when a cursor disappears is invisible to users.

   The durable subsystems of ACP/1 are untouched: nothing in this
   extension reads or writes the event log, manifest, mailbox, lease
   table, or CRDT stores.

8.  Security Considerations

   8.1.  Identity and spoofing.

      The authority MUST set an entry's actor from the authenticated
      token (ACP/1 Section 5.2) and MUST ignore any actor-like field
      inside "state" for identity purposes.  An actor can therefore
      only ever write, refresh, or clear ITS OWN (actor, session)
      entries; there is no operation that mutates another actor's
      awareness.  This deliberately closes the known gap in the Yjs
      awareness protocol, which is unauthenticated by design ("a
      malicious peer can claim arbitrary cursor or presence data"):
      ACP awareness entries are always attributable to the
      authenticated actor.

   8.2.  Visibility and roles.

      Awareness is space-scoped: any principal that can read the space
      can see who is present and their state objects -- the same
      posture as the ACP/1 roster (GET /v1/agents) and consistent with
      "the space is the boundary" (ACP/1 Section 7).  Deployments for
      which presence itself is sensitive MUST use separate spaces.
      Reading awareness requires "reader"; writing awareness SHOULD be
      permitted to "reader" as well (it mutates no durable state and a
      read-only observer legitimately has a cursor), but a daemon MAY
      restrict writes to "writer" and above.  A scoped token (EXT-7)
      MAY additionally be barred from awareness writes by its scope.

   8.3.  Flooding and amplification.

      Awareness is the highest-frequency write surface in ACP.  A
      daemon MUST charge awareness writes against the sender's rate
      limit (ACP/1 Section 5.4), MUST bound the state size and the
      session count and length (Section 4.2), and SHOULD bound the
      per-space entry count (live actors times the per-actor session
      bound is the natural limit).  The delta stream SHOULD coalesce
      bursts per entry (delivering the newest state rather than every
      intermediate) when a consumer falls behind; dropping superseded
      intermediates is always safe (Section 3.2).  Because awareness
      is volatile and bounded on every axis (state size, sessions,
      TTL, rate), a misbehaving client can degrade only its own
      display presence -- it can no longer convert presence churn
      into durable-log growth or write-path load (the Section 1.4
      failure mode).

   8.4.  No durable record -- by design and as a privacy property.

      Because awareness never touches the log, it leaves NO audit
      trail: an actor's cursor history is not reconstructable after the
      fact.  This is intentional (it is display state), and it is also
      the reason awareness MUST NOT be used to carry anything that
      needs auditing -- decisions, claims, or content belong in the
      event log where they are attributable and replayable.

   8.5.  State content.

      The state object is opaque, client-authored JSON re-displayed to
      other clients.  Consumers MUST treat it as untrusted data (no
      markup interpretation, bounded rendering), exactly as they treat
      event context objects (ACP/1 Section 19).

9.  Rollout Plan

   This is a single, self-contained feature and ships as one phase:

      Phase 1 -- "awareness".  The volatile per-space store keyed by
         (actor, session); POST set with TTL, size, and session
         bounds; GET snapshot; NDJSON follow stream with
         join/update/leave deltas and synthetic joins; periodic
         expiry sweep; leader-served in cluster mode; the "awareness"
         capability and limits hints.

      Gate -- the ephemerality property tests.  Implementation MUST
         NOT advertise the capability until tests prove: (a) under
         sustained simulated cursor/heartbeat/status churn routed
         through awareness, every durable artifact (event log, CRDT
         op logs, snapshots) stays FLAT -- the direct reproduction of
         the Section 1.4 incident, now bounded; (b) a killed client's
         entries vanish within one TTL with "leave" deltas; (c) no
         awareness content is ever observable through any durable
         read path; (d) an actor cannot write another actor's entry.

   The phase is additive and reversible: a daemon may drop the
   capability without breaking ACP/1 peers (clients degrade to no
   cursors; the durable protocol is untouched).  The natural first
   consumer is a collaborative-board or editor client migrating its
   presence OFF a durable document (Section 1.4); implementations
   SHOULD land the two together so the feature ships with a real
   user and the incident's workload as its acceptance test.

10. Open Questions

   o  Scaling the fan-out.  Leader-served awareness bottlenecks at the
      leader for very large spaces.  A relay/gossip tier -- nodes
      exchanging awareness peer-to-peer, eventually consistent -- would
      generalize the ephemeral tier; it is deliberately out of scope
      here and would be its own proposal.

   o  Scoping awareness to a document or channel.  A space with many
      concurrently-edited docs may want "awareness for doc X" rather
      than the whole space (the EXT-1 channel-filter grammar is the
      obvious shape: ?channel=...).  This proposal keeps v1 space-wide
      and defers the filter; the RECOMMENDED "doc" convention of
      Section 4.2 covers the interim, client-side.

   o  Follower-served reads.  Whether followers may serve snapshot/
      follow from a locally-relayed copy (weaker consistency, better
      spread) instead of proxying to the leader.

   o  A server-suggested heartbeat interval in the limits block, so
      pacing is negotiated rather than convention.

   o  Whether an explicit leave should be its own verb
      (DELETE /v1/awareness) rather than the null-state write of
      Section 4.2.  This proposal keeps the surface to one POST.


11. Amendment 1 (2026-07-27): Realtime WebSocket Binding, Server-Side
    Coalescing, and Optional Cross-Node Fan-out

   This section is ADDITIVE.  Sections 1-10 and Appendices A-C are
   unchanged; every mechanism here is OPTIONAL and separately
   capability-negotiated, and the load-bearing invariant of Section 3.1
   (awareness is ephemeral, un-replicated, never in the durable log or
   snapshots) continues to hold WITHOUT exception.  The amendment adds a
   transport tuned for the highest-frequency awareness case -- live
   cursors -- and turns the fan-out question left open in Sections 7 and
   10 into a concrete, optional design.  It is motivated by the July 2026
   collaborative-board workload (Section 1.4): coarse liveness rides POST
   /v1/agents/beat, but sub-second cursor motion wants a bidirectional,
   rate-bounded channel of the kind Figma, Miro, Liveblocks, and the Yjs
   awareness protocol use.

   11.1.  What this amendment adds (and does not).

      Adds, all OPTIONAL:
        o  a server-side COALESCING TICK (Section 11.2) that bounds delta
           fan-out by a fixed rate rather than by client input rate,
           applicable to BOTH the existing NDJSON stream and the new
           WebSocket binding;
        o  a bidirectional WEBSOCKET BINDING (Section 11.3) that carries
           the caller's own writes AND the delta stream over one
           connection;
        o  an OPTIONAL CROSS-NODE FAN-OUT (Section 11.4) that lets any
           node serve cluster-wide awareness by best-effort gossip,
           relaxing the Section 7 leader-served baseline and advancing the
           Section 10 "scaling the fan-out" question.

      Does NOT change: the awareness DATA MODEL (Sections 4.1-4.2 -- a
      keyed per-(actor,session) last-writer-wins register of opaque,
      bounded state with TTL expiry), the meaning of a delta
      (Section 4.4), the security posture (Section 8), or the durable
      subsystems (untouched).  A daemon MAY implement none, some, or all
      of these; the POST + NDJSON follow of Section 4 and the leader-
      served topology of Section 7 remain the REQUIRED baseline whenever
      the amendment's capabilities are absent.

   11.2.  Server-side coalescing: the tick.

      Section 8.3 already permits coalescing bursts per entry when a
      consumer falls behind.  This amendment promotes that to a first-
      class, always-available property with a fixed rate.

      A daemon MAY serve awareness deltas on a fixed COALESCING TICK.
      Within one tick interval it MUST retain only the NEWEST state per
      (actor, session) and MUST emit AT MOST ONE delta per (actor,
      session) per tick (newest-wins; superseded intermediates are
      dropped -- always safe, Section 3.2).  The RECOMMENDED tick rate is
      10-20 Hz (50-100 ms), matching the proven convention of the Yjs
      awareness protocol and the Liveblocks presence throttle (default
      100 ms).  "leave" deltas (explicit or TTL, Section 4.5) SHOULD be
      emitted promptly and are NOT withheld for coalescing.

      The tick is a property of the STORE's emission, so it applies
      IDENTICALLY to the NDJSON follow stream (Section 4.4) and the
      WebSocket binding (Section 11.3): the transport changes only how a
      delta is framed, never which deltas are emitted.  Because the tick
      caps emission at (live entries x tick rate x subscribers)
      regardless of how fast clients write, it BOUNDS awareness fan-out
      by construction -- the ephemeral-tier analogue of the durable-store
      bounds ACP applies elsewhere.  A daemon that ticks SHOULD advertise
      the rate (Section 11.5) so clients can pace input accordingly; the
      client-side sampling advice of Section 4.2 (30-60 ms) still applies.

   11.3.  The WebSocket binding (OPTIONAL).

      A daemon MAY offer awareness over a WebSocket in addition to the
      Section 4 HTTP surface:

         GET /v1/awareness?transport=ws        ; HTTP Upgrade: websocket

      The Upgrade request carries the standard bearer auth and headers
      (Section 6); the daemon MUST authenticate it exactly as it
      authenticates POST /v1/awareness, MUST scope it to the caller's
      space, and MUST apply the same role policy (Section 8.2).  On a
      daemon without the binding the path is 404 (Section 4.7); clients
      discover it via the "awareness-ws" capability (Section 11.5).

      The connection is BIDIRECTIONAL and carries text frames, each a
      single JSON object with an "op" discriminator:

        client -> server:
          { "op": "set", "state": <object>|null,
            "ttl_sec": <int>?, "session": <string>? }
              ; identical semantics, bounds, and errors to the
              ; POST /v1/awareness body (Section 4.2); "state": null is
              ; an explicit leave.  The actor is ALWAYS token-derived
              ; (Section 8.1); a client-supplied actor is ignored.
          { "op": "ping" }                      ; OPTIONAL keepalive

        server -> client:
          { "op": "delta", "type": "join"|"update"|"leave",
            "entry": AwarenessEntry }
              ; the Section 4.4 delta, one per frame; the stream SHOULD
              ; open with a synthetic "join" per live entry, exactly as
              ; the NDJSON follow does, so no separate snapshot is needed.
          { "op": "pong" }                      ; answer to a ping

      One socket therefore both PUBLISHES the caller's own awareness and
      SUBSCRIBES to everyone's -- the property the POST + separate-follow
      split cannot provide at cursor frequency.  Deltas emitted on the
      socket obey the coalescing tick (Section 11.2) when the daemon
      ticks.  Writes over the socket MUST count against the sender's rate
      limit (Section 8.3) exactly as POST writes do.

      Liveness: a daemon MAY treat an open, responsive socket as
      refreshing that connection's entries at the socket's own keepalive
      cadence (WebSocket ping/pong or transport keepalive), so a client
      on the socket need not re-POST to avoid TTL expiry; a daemon that
      does so MUST document the effective refresh and MUST still expire an
      entry whose socket has gone silent past its TTL.  A clean close (or
      a "set" with "state": null) MUST emit "leave" for that connection's
      entries.  Delivery remains best-effort (Section 3.3): a slow
      consumer's superseded frames are dropped (keep-latest), never
      buffered without bound.

   11.4.  Cross-node fan-out (OPTIONAL): from leader-served to gossip.

      Section 7 specifies LEADER-SERVED awareness as the cluster
      baseline: correct and simple, but it bottlenecks fan-out at the
      leader and loses the map on leader change (rebuilt within one TTL).
      Section 10 left "scaling the fan-out" open.  This amendment defines,
      as an OPTIONAL capability, a spectrum a deployment MAY choose from:

        T1  Leader-served (Section 7).  The unchanged baseline; REQUIRED
            to remain available when the cluster capability is absent.

        T2  Node-local with affinity.  Each node serves awareness from
            its OWN volatile store, and the deployment pins all clients of
            a given space (or a document within it) to one node via
            session affinity at the load balancer.  Simplest horizontal
            spread; correct because a space's editors then share one
            store.  Its limitation -- editors of one space split across
            nodes do not see each other -- is what T3 removes.

        T3  Best-effort gossip fan-out.  Each node forwards the awareness
            deltas it ORIGINATES to its peer nodes over a VOLATILE side
            channel, and peers merge them into their local store as remote
            entries governed by the SAME TTL.  Every node then has a
            cluster-wide view without a leader bottleneck and without a
            single point of loss: it is eventually consistent, has no
            authoritative global process, and a node (or leader) failure
            drops only that node's originations, rebuilt within one TTL.
            This is the design proven by Phoenix Presence -- a per-node
            tracker that replicates presence by CRDT + heartbeat gossip
            over pub/sub, with NO datastore.

      The Section 3.1 invariant is preserved WITHOUT exception under all
      three: the gossip of T3 is VOLATILE and BEST-EFFORT, carried on a
      side channel that is NOT the consensus log and NOT any snapshot;
      awareness is still never proposed as a state-machine command, never
      assigned a seq, never durable.  Cross-node gossip that spreads
      awareness MUST NOT flow through Raft -- that would reintroduce both
      the Section 7 determinism constraint (a wall-clock-expiring, high-
      churn record has no place in the deterministic apply path, ACP/1
      Section 17) and the Section 1.4 log growth.  It is a peer-to-peer
      volatile exchange only.

      A daemon offering T3 advertises "awareness-cluster" (Section 11.5).
      This RELAXES the Section 7 "gossip is a non-goal" disposition to an
      OPTIONAL feature and RESOLVES the first Section 10 open question;
      Sections 7 and 10 are otherwise unchanged and describe the still-
      valid baseline.

   11.5.  Capability and limits additions.

      A daemon advertises each OPTIONAL mechanism it implements in the
      shared "capabilities" list (Section 5, Appendix A):

        "awareness-ws"       ; the Section 11.3 WebSocket binding
        "awareness-cluster"  ; the Section 11.4 T3 cross-node fan-out

      and MAY extend the "limits" hint with the coalescing tick:

        "limits": { ..., "awareness_tick_hz": <int> }   ; Section 11.2

      "awareness-ws" MUST be advertised only when the binding implements
      all of Section 11.3 (bidirectional set + delta, synthetic joins,
      leave on close, auth and bounds parity with Section 4).
      "awareness-cluster" MUST be advertised only when cross-node deltas
      are actually exchanged (T3).  A client MUST treat the absence of
      "awareness-ws" as "use the Section 4 HTTP surface", and MUST NOT
      assume cluster-wide visibility unless "awareness-cluster" is
      present.

   11.6.  Wire API additions (summary).

        New (OPTIONAL):
          GET /v1/awareness?transport=ws   ; WebSocket Upgrade (11.3)

        Frames (11.3):  { "op": "set"|"delta"|"ping"|"pong", ... }
        New capabilities (11.5): "awareness-ws", "awareness-cluster"
        New limits hint (11.5):  "awareness_tick_hz"

      No durable ACP/1 type changes; the AwarenessEntry / AwarenessDelta /
      AwarenessSet shapes of Appendix A are reused verbatim inside the
      WebSocket frames.

   11.7.  Security (delta over Section 8).

      The WebSocket binding inherits Section 8 in full: actor is token-
      derived (8.1), space-scoped visibility (8.2), rate-limited writes
      and bounded state/session/TTL (8.3), no durable record (8.4),
      opaque untrusted state (8.5).  Two additions specific to the long-
      lived socket and the gossip tier:

        o  A daemon MUST bound the number of concurrent awareness
           WebSocket connections (per space and per actor) and reject or
           evict beyond the bound, so an attacker cannot exhaust
           connection state -- the socket analogue of the Section 4.2
           entry bounds -- and a per-connection write-rate cap MUST apply
           (Section 8.3).
        o  T3 gossip (Section 11.4) crosses the trust boundary between
           nodes and therefore MUST be authenticated and confidential on
           the wire (ACP/1 Section 14.4 mTLS, or a trusted private network
           absent a CA); a receiving node MUST attribute a gossiped entry
           to the ORIGINATING node's authenticated actor, never to a
           client-settable field.

   11.8.  Backward compatibility.

      Every addition is OPTIONAL and negotiated.  A daemon implementing
      none of Section 11 is a fully conformant ext-9 daemon.  A client
      that finds neither "awareness-ws" nor "awareness-cluster" uses the
      Section 4 HTTP surface against the Section 7 leader-served topology,
      exactly as before.  The protocol version string remains "acp/1".


Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types (JSON)

   AwarenessSet (new -- the POST /v1/awareness body):
      { "state":   <object> | null,   ; null = explicit leave
        "ttl_sec": <int>?,            ; default 30, bounded by daemon
        "session": <string>? }        ; default "", bounded by daemon

   AwarenessEntry (new -- one live entry; the POST response and the
   snapshot/stream element):
      { "actor":   <string>,          ; token-derived, never client-set
        "session": <string>,          ; client-chosen discriminator
        "state":   <object>,
        "ttl_sec": <int>,
        "updated": <rfc3339>,
        "expires": <rfc3339> }

   AwarenessSnapshot (new -- GET /v1/awareness response):
      { "entries": [ AwarenessEntry, ... ] }

   AwarenessDelta (new -- one NDJSON line of the follow stream):
      { "type": "join" | "update" | "leave",
        "entry": AwarenessEntry }     ; a "leave" MAY carry actor only

   Health/Stats (changed -- shared "capabilities" plus OPTIONAL limits
   hints):
      { ...existing fields...,
        "protocol": "acp/1",
        "capabilities": [<string>],   ; includes "awareness"
        "limits": { "awareness_max_state_bytes": <int>,
                    "awareness_default_ttl_sec": <int>,
                    "awareness_max_ttl_sec": <int> }? }

   No durable ACP/1 type changes.  Awareness entries never appear in
   Event, snapshot, or any replicated structure.


Appendix B.  New Error Conditions

   400  Bad request: "state" missing (and not an explicit leave), not
        a JSON object, or exceeding the size bound; ttl_sec
        non-positive or above the daemon maximum; "session" exceeding
        the daemon's length bound (Section 4.2).
   401  Unauthorized: missing or invalid bearer token (ACP/1).
   403  Forbidden: the caller's role does not permit awareness writes
        under the daemon's policy (Section 8.2), or a scoped token
        (EXT-7) is barred from awareness.
   404  Not found: the daemon does not implement this extension
        (Section 4.7).
   429  Too Many Requests: awareness write rate exceeds the sender's
        budget (Section 8.3); see Retry-After.

   A successful set returns 200 with the stored AwarenessEntry.  All
   other status codes carry the ACP/1 meanings (Appendix B of
   rfc/acp-1.txt).


Appendix C.  Worked Examples

   C.1.  Capability check.

      GET /v1/healthz
      -> { "status": "ok", "protocol": "acp/1",
           "capabilities": ["awareness"],
           "limits": { "awareness_max_state_bytes": 16384,
                       "awareness_default_ttl_sec": 30 } }

   C.2.  Set my cursor.

      POST /v1/awareness
      Authorization: Bearer <tok>
      { "state": { "doc": "boards/q3", "cursor": { "node": "n7" },
                   "status": "editing" },
        "ttl_sec": 30, "session": "tab-1" }

      < 200 OK
      < { "actor": "pod-b", "session": "tab-1",
      <   "state": { "doc": "boards/q3",
      <     "cursor": { "node": "n7" }, "status": "editing" },
      <   "ttl_sec": 30, "updated": "2026-07-13T10:00:00Z",
      <   "expires": "2026-07-13T10:00:30Z" }

      The actor is derived from the token; a client-supplied actor
      would be ignored.  A second tab writes session "tab-2" and both
      cursors render; "session" may be omitted entirely by
      single-connection agents (default "").

   C.3.  Follow the deltas.

      GET /v1/awareness?follow=true
      < {"type":"join","entry":{"actor":"pod-a", ...}}   ; synthetic
      < {"type":"join","entry":{"actor":"pod-b", ...}}   ; synthetic
      < {"type":"update","entry":{"actor":"pod-b",
          "state":{"cursor":{"node":"n9"}}, ...}}
      < {"type":"leave","entry":{"actor":"pod-a"}}       ; TTL expired

      The two synthetic joins prime the follower; no separate snapshot
      request is needed.

   C.4.  Explicit leave on shutdown.

      POST /v1/awareness
      { "state": null }
      < 200 OK
      Peers receive {"type":"leave","entry":{"actor":"pod-b"}}
      immediately instead of waiting out the TTL.

   C.5.  Daemon restart (nothing to recover).

      The daemon restarts; the awareness map is empty; the durable log
      is untouched.  Each client's next heartbeat re-creates its entry
      ("join" deltas fire) and the board's cursors reappear within one
      heartbeat interval.


Authors' Addresses

   A. Bot (Editor)
   ab0t
   https://ab0t.com

   This extension proposal accompanies the ACP/1 specification
   (rfc/acp-1.txt) and the reference implementation distributed at
   https://github.com/ab0t-com/acp .
