ab0t                                                          A. Bot, Ed.
Request for Comments: ACP/EXT-14                                     ab0t.com
Updates: ACP/EXT-5                                                 July 2026
Category: Extension Proposal                                       ISSN: n/a


      ACP Extension Proposal 14: Identity-Preserving MOVE for the
                       Structured (JSON) CRDT


   [ Editor's note: the extension NUMBER "14" in "ACP/EXT-14" is
     PROVISIONAL.  The protocol owner assigns the final ACP/EXT number
     on acceptance; until then treat the number as a placeholder. ]


Abstract

   This document is an EXTENSION PROPOSAL for the Agent Coordination
   Protocol, Version 1 (ACP/1).  It specifies one additive,
   backward-compatible feature: a fifth operation type, "mv", for the
   structured (JSON) CRDT of ACP/EXT-5, which relocates an EXISTING
   node -- a subtree bound to an object key, or an array element -- to
   a new location while PRESERVING ITS IDENTITY (its nid).

   EXT-5 deliberately deferred move (EXT-5 Sections 3.6(d), 11.3): a
   move expressed as delete-plus-reinsert mints a fresh nid, so two
   replicas moving the same subtree concurrently DUPLICATE it, and an
   edit made concurrently with a move lands on the deleted copy and is
   LOST.  Worse, two moves that are each individually legal can form a
   parent CYCLE when merged.  This extension closes that gap with the
   design the peer-reviewed move literature converges on (Appendix D):
   a move is a new leader-stamped PLACEMENT of the same node; the
   node's LOCATION is the greatest-stamped placement that does not
   create a cycle, resolved by a deterministic STAMP-ORDERED VALIDITY
   PASS at materialization; a move that would create a cycle is simply
   ignored and the node STAYS PUT -- nothing is duplicated, nothing
   vanishes, and no history is rewritten.

   No new endpoint is added: "mv" travels through the existing
   POST /v1/crdt/json/ops.  The feature is negotiated by a new
   capability string, "crdtjson-move", with an explicit operator-gated
   rollout procedure for mixed-version clusters (Section 9).  None of
   this changes the wire version "acp/1".  Move for the TEXT/sequence
   CRDT of ACP/1 Section 12 is an explicit NON-GOAL of this document
   and is reserved for a future extension (Section 3.7).

Status of This Memo

   [ REVISION B APPLIED (2026-07-23): the independent adversarial
     review (tickets/crdt-json-move-20260722/REVIEW_opus_rfc.md) found
     a BLOCKING self-contradiction (its F1): the draft's observed
     retirement of the moved node's OWN placements (old Section 4.2)
     destroyed the fallback the stays-put rule (Section 4.4) depends
     on -- in the concurrent A<->B cycle both subtrees vanished, the
     forbidden outcome, and worked example C.3 was unreachable.  The
     finding was independently re-derived and CONFIRMED.  Revision B
     resolves it by DERIVED SUPPRESSION: location(c) is chosen by
     VALIDITY (greatest-stamped valid placement, history-stable), a
     node renders only if its location is LIVE (no fallback past a
     deleted winner -- delete means delete), and "mv" retires only
     source-slot GHOSTS, never the child's own placements (Sections
     4.2-4.4; recomputed examples C.3/C.4).  Note the review's own
     sketched fix #2 was subtly wrong (it would have reintroduced
     delete-after-move resurrection); the rule above is the corrected
     resolution and was verified by hand against C.1-C.5 and the
     compaction-transparency invariant.  Also folded: F2 (member
     join/replace rule, Section 9), F3 (exact depth inequality +
     honesty about concurrency, Section 4.5), F4-F13 (text fixes).
     Ready for team re-review; NOT ready for implementation until the
     owner accepts. ]

   This is a PROPOSAL, not yet part of the normative ACP/1
   specification (rfc/acp-1.txt).  It is published for review by the
   team and for the protocol owner's approval.  The extension number
   EXT-14 is PROVISIONAL; the protocol owner assigns final numbers on
   acceptance.  It builds on ACP/EXT-5 (structured CRDT), which is
   ACCEPTED and IMPLEMENTED; this proposal is NOT implemented.

   This memo was drafted from the design record in
   tickets/crdt-json-move-20260722/ (DESIGN rev 2 + IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN
   rev 2), which was independently and adversarially reviewed before
   drafting; the review findings (cycle-outcome semantics, observed
   retirement, the location-aware read path, and the mixed-version
   rollout hazard) are folded into the normative text below rather
   than left as open questions.

   Header note (review F9): "Updates: ACP/EXT-5" is deliberate --
   this extension genuinely changes the EXT-5 data model (list
   placements gain a stamp, Section 4.1/Appendix A; a fifth op type
   exists that an EXT-5 implementation must know about once "mv" ops
   are in a log).  The family convention is inconsistent (EXT-11
   also builds on EXT-5 yet says "Updates: ACP/1"); the owner should
   pick one convention at acceptance and apply it across the family.

   If accepted, the feature folds into a future "acp/1.1" capability
   set; the base protocol version string remains "acp/1".
   Distribution is unlimited.

====== BEGIN UNSIGNED AMENDMENT · id=ext14-status-accepted · proposed 2026-07-28 · NOT normative until ratified ======
   [ PROPOSED AMENDMENT -- UNSIGNED (owner ratification).  Dated 2026-07-28;
     awaiting the protocol owner's signature per the amendment-governance
     SOP; until signed, this memo remains a PROPOSAL of record. ]

   Amendment (2026-07-28) -- OWNER RATIFICATION (proposed).  The move
   operation of this document is IMPLEMENTED in the reference
   implementation and advertised as the capability string "crdtjson-move";
   it is enforced whenever the structured (EXT-5) store is present.  On the
   owner's acceptance this Status changes from "PROPOSAL / not implemented"
   to ACCEPTED AND IMPLEMENTED, matching the EXT-4 / EXT-5 accepted-and-
   implemented precedent; the provisional extension number 14 is confirmed
   as final; and the owner selects the family "Updates:" convention raised
   in review note F9.  Until the owner signs this block the memo remains a
   PROPOSAL of record; the implementation's advertised capability is the
   honest state either way.
====== END UNSIGNED AMENDMENT · id=ext14-status-accepted ======

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 ab0t.  Licensed under the MIT License, the same
   license as the reference implementation and the base specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Motivation
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals
   4.  The Move Operation
   5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility
   6.  Wire API Additions
   7.  Determinism and High Availability
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  Rollout Plan (Mixed-Version Clusters)
   10. Open Questions
   Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types
   Appendix B.  New Error Conditions
   Appendix C.  Worked Examples
   Appendix D.  Research Basis and Algorithm Lineage
   Authors' Addresses


1.  Introduction and Motivation

   ACP/EXT-5 gives a space convergent structured documents: JSON node
   graphs mutated by four operations (set, del, lins, ldel), leader-
   stamped, totally ordered through the replicated log, materialized
   byte-identically on every replica.  What it does not give is a way
   to RELOCATE something.  Four concrete problems motivate this
   extension:

   1.1.  A move today destroys identity.

      With only {set, del, lins, ldel}, "move X from A to B" must be
      expressed as delete-at-A plus reinsert-at-B.  The reinserted
      value is a NEW node with a NEW nid (EXT-5 Section 4.4); the
      moved thing's identity is destroyed.  The reference JSON-Patch
      mapper does exactly this today (RFC 6902 "move" expands to
      remove + add) and documents the hazard as a known caveat.

   1.2.  Concurrent moves duplicate; concurrent edits are lost.

      If two actors concurrently move the same subtree, both deletes
      and both reinserts survive merge -- two copies with two fresh
      nids (duplication).  If one actor edits a field of a subtree
      while another moves it, the edit addresses the OLD nid, whose
      binding the move deleted: the edit lands on a dead node and is
      silently lost.  On a collaborative canvas this is user-visible:
      drag-reorder a card while a peer edits its text, and the text
      edit disappears.  These are precisely the failure modes
      documented in the move literature (Appendix D, [DK24] Figure
      1(b)).

   1.3.  Cycles: two legal moves can merge into an illegal state.

      Move B under A on one replica; concurrently move A under B on
      another.  Each is legal against the state it saw; the merged
      placement set contains a parent cycle A <-> B.  In ACP this can
      occur even with a single authority, because two pushes may be
      canonicalized against the same committed state before either
      commits (the canonicalize-then-propose window).  A correct move
      design MUST resolve cycles deterministically, identically on
      every replica, without hiding or corrupting data.

   1.4.  Only the authority can solve this cheaply.

      The serverless literature pays heavy machinery for this feature
      (per-replica revalidation, restore/reapply, lifecycle tracking --
      Appendix D) because without an authority every replica must
      re-derive move validity as ops arrive in different orders.  ACP
      has what those systems lack: a leader that stamps a TOTAL ORDER
      onto every operation (ACP/1 Section 17, EXT-5 Section 3.4).
      This extension exploits that: the validity rule of the
      literature's simple, from-scratch algorithm ([DK24] Algorithm 1)
      runs as a pure function inside materialization, with no
      incremental machinery at all.  We adopt the literature's
      SEMANTICS and skip its serverless COSTS.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
   [RFC2119] [RFC8174].

   This document uses the architecture, transport, authentication,
   role, and space definitions of ACP/1, and the structured-CRDT
   definitions of ACP/EXT-5 (document, node, nid, MAP, LIST, REGISTER,
   binding, tag, element id, LWW stamp, epoch, materialization,
   canonicalization) without restating them.  "EXT-5 Section N" points
   into acp-ext-5-structured-crdt.txt.

   STAMP:  The leader-assigned LWW ordering token of an op:
      (now, actor, op id), per EXT-5's accepted LWW rule (Status of
      This Memo, owner refinement 1).  Op ids are unique, so stamps
      form a STRICT TOTAL ORDER.

   PLACEMENT:  One (parent, slot) -> child reference: a MAP binding
      (parent nid, key, tag) -> child nid, or a LIST element
      (parent nid, element id) -> child nid.  EXT-5's set/lins each
      create one placement together with a new node; "mv" creates a
      placement referencing an EXISTING node.  Every placement carries
      the stamp of the op that created it.

   LIVE placement:  A placement whose binding tag has not been
      observed-removed and whose list element is not tombstoned.

   VALID placement:  A placement accepted by the validity pass of
      Section 4.4 (it does not create a parent cycle at its position
      in stamp order).  Validity is judged over ALL placements,
      regardless of liveness, and is HISTORY-STABLE: it depends only
      on smaller-stamped placements, so later operations can never
      change an earlier placement's verdict.

   LOCATION (of a node c):  location(c) = the greatest-stamped VALID
      placement of c (liveness NOT considered in the choice).  A node
      RENDERS at its location if and only if that placement is LIVE
      (Section 4.3); it renders nowhere otherwise.  There is no
      fallback past a dead location -- deletion is final; fallback
      happens only across INVALID (cycle-skipped) placements.

   STAYS-PUT RULE:  The cycle semantic of Section 4.4: a placement
      that would create a cycle is ignored; the node remains at its
      previous valid location.  (Literature outcome: [DK24] Figure
      1(c)/(d), "one move ignored".)

   GHOST PURGE (Revision B; replaces the draft's broader "observed
      retirement"):  The rule of Section 4.2: a "mv" carries the
      binding tags of OTHER children's live bindings at the source
      map slot (superseded "ghosts"), retired exactly as a "del"
      retires observed tags.  A "mv" MUST NOT retire the moved
      child's own placements -- those are SUPPRESSED derivationally.
      Unobserved (concurrent) placements survive.

   SUPPRESSED (derived, Revision B):  A placement renders nothing
      without being retired: either a greater-stamped VALID placement
      of the same child exists (out-arbitrated), or it is the child's
      location but is not live (deleted).  Suppression is computed at
      materialization and never written into removed/tombstone state
      by a "mv".

   RESOLVED VIEW:  The materialization-equivalent projection of the
      document (locations applied, losers hidden).  Section 4.6
      requires ALL reads -- rendering, path resolution, and index
      arithmetic -- to consult the same resolved view.

3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals

   3.1.  Identity is the point.

      A move MUST NOT mint a new nid.  The moved node keeps its
      identity, so (a) concurrent edits addressed to the node follow
      it to its new location, and (b) concurrent moves of the same
      node collapse to ONE winner instead of duplicating.  This is the
      property delete+reinsert cannot provide and the single reason
      this extension exists.

   3.2.  One operation for every move shape.

      Subtree move (map key -> map key), array-element move
      (reorder), and cross-container move (map -> list, list -> map)
      are ONE operation with one semantic: create a placement,
      arbitration does the rest.  The destination form is selected by
      the TARGET NODE'S KIND, normatively (Section 4.5) -- not by
      which optional fields happen to be present.

   3.3.  Move is data, not mechanism.

      Like EXT-11's "undo is data" principle: a "mv" is an ordinary
      appended, leader-stamped, replicated op.  Apply/integrate stays
      COMMUTATIVE, IDEMPOTENT, and APPLY-ONCE (EXT-5 Section 4.6);
      it only records the placement and retires observed tags.  ALL
      conflict and cycle resolution lives in the pure materialization
      function (Section 4.4).  No history is rewritten; no second
      replication path exists to get wrong.

   3.4.  Determinism by leader stamping.

      Everything replicas must agree on -- the op id, the stamp, the
      resolved child nid, the destination (target nid + key / minted
      element id), and the OBSERVED retirement set -- is fixed by the
      leader at canonicalize time and carried in the replicated op,
      per ACP/1 Section 17 and EXT-5 Section 3.4.  Followers apply
      verbatim and never re-resolve.

   3.5.  Compaction is observably transparent (new invariant).

      No sequence of future operations may distinguish a compacted
      replica from an uncompacted one by observable behavior.  EXT-5
      compaction (Section 5.8) already GCs superseded state; this
      extension MUST NOT create state that is invisible now but could
      become visible later (which compaction would silently break).
      The stays-put rule and observed retirement exist partly to
      preserve this invariant: nothing a move hides can ever resurface
      (Section 4.2), and nothing a cycle touches ever vanishes
      (Section 4.4).  Conformance is testable: for all op sequences,
      materialize(ops1 ++ ops2) == materialize(compact(ops1) ++ ops2).

   3.6.  Architected for the CRDT extension family.

      This design is chosen so that adjacent and future CRDT
      extensions compose without rework:

      o  UNDO (EXT-11).  Under EXT-11's server-computed inverses, the
         inverse of a "mv" group is definitional: a compensating "mv"
         re-asserting the node's previous location (plus re-binding
         any retired placements observed at undo time), computed by
         the same rules as every other inverse.  Had move been
         delete+reinsert, undo-of-move would require resurrecting a
         deleted subtree by id -- a second hard problem.  Accepting
         this extension therefore SIMPLIFIES EXT-11; EXT-11's
         Section 4.2 rules extend with one case ("mv": compensate
         with a mv back, restoring retired placements) and no new
         mechanism.

      o  A shared resolution kernel.  The validity pass (Section 4.4)
         is a stamp-ordered replay over the op set -- the same kernel
         shape EXT-11's inverse computation uses ("the document
         without my group").  Implementations MAY share this kernel;
         this document does not require it.

      o  SCHEMA VALIDATION (EXT-12).  A "mv" is a write; if EXT-12 is
         configured, the leader validates the post-move document like
         any other push (422 on violation).  No special case.

      o  COUNTERS / new node kinds (EXT-5 Section 11.4).  The
         placement/location model is kind-agnostic: any future node
         kind is movable with zero change to this specification.

   3.7.  Non-goals.

      This extension does NOT add:

      (a) MOVE FOR THE TEXT/SEQUENCE CRDT of ACP/1 Section 12.  The
          text type is character-granular; a text move is a RANGE
          move, which requires a range-identity model the character
          sequence does not have (single-element list move is solved
          in the literature [K20]; contiguous-range move is not).
          RESIDUAL LOSS MODE (users MUST be warned): reordering
          paragraphs in a Section 12 text document (e.g. via
          "acp crdt sync") still decomposes to delete+insert and still
          loses concurrent intra-paragraph edits.  Reserved for a
          future extension; design ticket crdt-text-move-20260722.
          Note that BLOCK-structured documents get block reorder from
          THIS extension already, by modeling blocks as EXT-5 list
          elements whose prose bodies are text-doc references (EXT-5
          Section 3.1) -- often the better architecture regardless.

      (b) COPY as a first-class op.  Copy genuinely duplicates
          (fresh nids are correct there); the existing expansion
          stands.

      (c) CROSS-DOCUMENT or cross-space moves.  "Child" MUST resolve
          within the addressed document.

      (d) Multi-node atomic move batches beyond what one push already
          provides (ops in one push apply as one group, EXT-5
          Section 5.5).

      (e) Any change to EXT-5's four existing operations, stores, or
          endpoints.

4.  The Move Operation

   4.1.  The op and its placement.

      A move op has type "t": "mv" and carries (wire detail in
      Appendix A):

         child          nid of the EXISTING node being moved.
         target (+key)  destination MAP slot, or
         target (+index_origin)
                        destination LIST position; the leader mints
                        the new element id (= the op id), exactly as
                        for "lins".  A zero/root index_origin means
                        the list head, as in EXT-5.
         tags           the GHOST-PURGE set (Section 4.2): observed
                        live binding tags of OTHER children at the
                        source map slot, stamped by the leader.
                        NEVER includes placements of "child" itself
                        (Revision B).
         now/actor/id   the leader stamp (EXT-5 Section 3.4).
         from/path      client-convenience source and destination
                        paths, resolved and cleared by the leader
                        (EXT-5 Section 5.4).

      Applying a "mv" RECORDS one new placement (parent = target,
      slot = key or new element id, child = child, stamp = the op's
      stamp) and retires the listed ghost tags.  Nothing else: no
      cycle logic, no arbitration, no errors (a malformed op is a
      deterministic no-op, as in EXT-5).  Guard against out-of-order
      deletion, split by destination kind (review F12): a MAP-
      destination "mv" whose op id is already in the observed-removed
      tag set MUST stay dead (the "set" guard); a LIST-destination
      "mv" whose minted element id is already tombstoned in the RGA
      MUST stay dead (the "lins"/tombstone guard).

      Implementation note (normative effect): LIST placements MUST
      carry their placement stamp.  EXT-5 implementations that store
      only element->child for lists must widen that record; without a
      stamp, list placements cannot be arbitrated against map
      placements in Section 4.3.

   4.2.  What happens to the old placement (Revision B: derived
         suppression + a minimal ghost purge).

      The draft rule ("retire every live placement of the child")
      was found jointly unsatisfiable with stays-put (review F1,
      confirmed): in the concurrent A<->B cycle each move retired the
      OTHER node's previous home, so the cycle loser had no fallback
      and both subtrees vanished.  Revision B splits the concern:

      (1) THE CHILD'S OWN OLD PLACEMENTS ARE NEVER RETIRED BY A "mv".
          They are SUPPRESSED derivationally: location(c) is the
          greatest-stamped VALID placement (Section 4.4), so a
          winning move out-arbitrates every older placement of the
          same child with no state change.  Because a placement's
          validity is history-stable, this suppression survives
          compaction unchanged (Section 3.5 holds).

      (2) NO FALLBACK PAST A DEAD LOCATION (the no-resurrection
          rule).  A node renders only if location(c) is LIVE.  If
          the winning placement is deleted (observed-removed /
          tombstoned), the node renders NOWHERE -- location does NOT
          fall back to an older live placement.  Fallback occurs
          ONLY across INVALID (cycle-skipped) placements, which is
          exactly the stays-put case.  Delete means delete; losing
          an arbitration means staying put.

      (3) GHOST PURGE (the only retirement a "mv" performs).  At
          canonicalize time the leader stamps into "tags" the
          observed live binding tags of OTHER children at the SOURCE
          map slot -- the superseded values a departing winner would
          otherwise re-expose (slot k held X superseded by Y; moving
          Y away must not resurrect X).  This is the "del" observed-
          tags discipline (EXT-5 Section 4.1) scoped to the source
          slot, minus the moved child's own tags.  For a LIST source
          no purge is needed: list elements are not LWW-superseded,
          and the source element is suppressed by rule (1) and
          skipped by the resolved view (Section 4.6).  If no source
          slot is determinable, "tags" is empty (Section 4.5).

      Consequences, each REQUIRED and each covered by a named
      conformance test (Section 7):

         o  No duplication: concurrent "mv"s of one child = multiple
            placements, one location, losers render nothing.
         o  Stays-put works WITH deletion semantics: the cycle loser
            falls back to its previous VALID placement, which is
            still live because no "mv" retired it (C.3); a deleted
            winner does not fall back (C.4(a)).
         o  No ghost resurrection: the vacated slot empties exactly
            as del+set would leave it, independent of compaction
            timing (Section 3.5).
         o  Concurrent edits follow: an edit addresses the child's
            nid, which nothing here touches.
         o  Concurrent del-vs-mv: a "del" at the old location that
            never observed the mv's new placement does not kill it
            -- the node SURVIVES at its new location (add-wins
            analog; C.4(b)).

   4.3.  Arbitration (two levels, normative order).

      1. Per-child: location(c) = the greatest-stamped VALID
         placement of c (Section 4.4 decides validity; liveness is
         NOT part of the choice).  c RENDERS at location(c) only if
         that placement is LIVE (Section 4.2 rule (2)).  With no
         cycles involved this is plain LWW -- last move wins.

      2. Per-slot (FILTER-THEN-MAX): a map slot (P, k) renders the
         child c such that a live placement (P, k, c) exists AND
         location(c) == (P, k); if several children qualify
         (concurrent moves INTO one slot), the greatest-stamped
         qualifying placement wins and the losers render nothing --
         the same fate as a superseded "set" binding (overwrite
         semantics).  Implementations MUST filter to
         location-qualifying placements BEFORE taking the maximum: a
         stale higher-stamped binding of a child that has moved away
         MUST NOT suppress a legitimately-located child.

      A LIST renders its non-tombstoned elements in sequence order,
      SKIPPING any element whose child's location is elsewhere (no
      null holes); such elements are also EXCLUDED from index
      arithmetic (Section 4.6).

   4.4.  The validity pass (cycle resolution -- normative algorithm).

      Materialization is preceded by a pure pass over the applied op
      set (this is [DK24] Algorithm 1 driven by ACP's leader-total
      stamp order; see Appendix D for the lineage):

         resolve(doc):
           P <- ALL placements of all non-root nodes, live AND dead
                ; dead placements participate so the validity of a
                ; deleted winner is well-defined (Section 4.2 rule 2)
           sort P ascending by stamp        ; strict total order:
                                            ;   (now, actor, op id)
           parent <- {}                     ; child -> (parent, slot)
           for (stamp, child, par, slot) in P:
             if child is a container        ; MAP or LIST; a child
                                            ; whose node is not yet
                                            ; present is treated as
                                            ; a REGISTER (no
                                            ; descendants) at this
                                            ; evaluation
                and isAncestorOrSelf(parent, par, child):
               continue                     ; INVALID: would create a
                                            ; cycle; child STAYS PUT
                                            ; at its previous VALID
                                            ; placement
             parent[child] <- (par, slot)   ; VALID: later valid
                                            ; placements override --
                                            ; this IS the per-child
                                            ; LWW of Section 4.3
           return parent                    ; location(c) for all c;
                                            ; RENDER c iff its entry
                                            ; is LIVE (4.2 rule 2)

         isAncestorOrSelf(parent, node, anc):
           while node is not ROOT and parent has an entry for node:
             if node == anc: return true
             node <- parent[node].parent
           return (node == anc)

      Sentinel note (review F8, normative): "parent has an entry" is
      the termination condition for an unplaced node -- the ABSENCE
      of a map entry, which is distinct from both the zero id and
      ROOT's reserved nid.  An implementation reading a missing key
      as a zero value MUST NOT walk it (infinite-loop trap).

      Unknown-child note (review F7, normative): a placement whose
      child node has not yet been created (buffer-free delivery,
      EXT-5's pending discipline) is processed with the child
      treated as having NO descendants (register-equivalent: the
      ancestor check is skipped for placements OF it, and a walk
      arriving AT it stops as unplaced-or-leaf).  It renders nothing
      until the child's creation op applies.  The pass is recomputed
      per materialization over the then-current op set, so replicas
      holding the same set agree at every point.

      Properties (each REQUIRED of an implementation):

         o  STAYS-PUT: an invalid (cycle-creating) placement is
            skipped; the child keeps its previous valid location.
            In the concurrent A<->B case exactly one of the two moves
            takes effect (the greater-stamped one that remains
            acyclic at its turn); BOTH nodes remain visible.  A
            resolved cycle MUST NOT hide, delete, or duplicate any
            node.  (Rejected alternative, recorded for reviewers:
            "hide the cycle" -- rendering cyclic nodes unreachable --
            silently vanishes every subtree in the cycle and the loss
            becomes PERMANENT at the next compaction, violating
            Section 3.5.  It MUST NOT be implemented.)

         o  SCALAR SHORTCUT: a REGISTER has no children and can never
            be an ancestor; register placements skip the ancestor
            check ([DK24] Section 3.2).

         o  DETERMINISM / ORDER-INDEPENDENCE: the input is the SET of
            placements (live and dead) plus the liveness state; the
            sort key is a strict total order; the output is a pure
            function of the applied op set -- byte-identical on every
            replica regardless of delivery order or duplication (the
            EXT-5 Section 4.6 contract).  Validity is HISTORY-STABLE
            (a placement's verdict depends only on smaller-stamped
            placements), which is what makes compaction transparent:
            the snapshot keeps exactly the valid winners, and no
            later op can retroactively invalidate them.

         o  TERMINATION: one pass over P; the parent map is at all
            times a forest (cycle-creating placements are never
            applied), so every ancestor walk is bounded by tree
            height.  Cost O(|P| log |P|) for the sort plus one
            bounded walk per CONTAINER move; within the EXT-5
            Section 9.2 bounds this is comparable to materialization
            itself.  Implementations MAY memoize the resolved
            locations keyed by applied-op count.

   4.5.  Addressing and validation (canonicalize-time, leader-only).

      As in EXT-5 Section 5.4, path forms are client convenience; the
      leader resolves and stores canonical NID form.  The leader MUST
      reject (400) a "mv" whose:

         o  "child" is the root, is unknown, or does not resolve
            within the addressed document;
         o  destination form mismatches the target node's kind ("key"
            with a LIST target, "index_origin" with a MAP target) --
            the TARGET KIND selects the form, never field presence
            (a zero index_origin legitimately means "list head");
         o  resulting materialized depth would exceed the EXT-5
            Section 9.2 MaxDepth bound.  Exact inequality (review
            F3a, normative):

               depth(targetParent) + 1 + height(movedSubtree)
                  <= MaxDepth

            where depth(root) = 0, and height(movedSubtree) = the
            number of node levels strictly BELOW the moved node
            (a leaf has height 0).  HONESTY CLAUSE (review F3b):
            this check runs at canonicalize time against committed
            state and is BEST-EFFORT -- concurrently-canonicalized
            moves, each individually within bound, can compose a
            materialized tree deeper than MaxDepth (the same race
            window as cycles, Section 1.3).  There is deliberately
            NO materialization-time depth rejection (it would
            re-open the where-does-the-node-go question); instead
            deeper-than-bound nodes remain renderable but MAY be
            path-unaddressable, and the Section 8.2 cost statement
            is bounded by ACTUAL height, not MaxDepth.

      The leader MUST reject with 409 (+ "current", the rebaseable
      conflict class -- review F4 resolved in favor of 409, matching
      Appendix B) a "mv" whose destination lies INSIDE the moved
      subtree as of committed state.  This is a courtesy fast-reject;
      the authoritative guard is Section 4.4, because two racing
      pushes can each pass this check (Section 1.3).

      SOURCE-SLOT determination for the ghost purge (review F5,
      normative): if "from" is supplied, the source slot is the map
      slot the resolved source path denotes.  If the "mv" is
      submitted in NID form WITHOUT "from", the source slot is the
      slot of location(child) as of committed state at canonicalize
      time; if location(child) is a LIST element or the child is
      currently unplaced, there is no source map slot and "tags" is
      empty.  Implementations MUST NOT guess beyond this rule.

      An unresolvable "from"/"path" follows EXT-5 Section 5.6
      (409 + current value, or create_intermediate for the
      DESTINATION only; a missing SOURCE is always 409 -- there is
      nothing to move).

   4.6.  One resolved view for every read (normative).

      Path resolution, list index arithmetic, materialization, and
      compaction MUST all consult the SAME resolved view of Sections
      4.3-4.4:

         o  Path descent follows the slot's RENDERED occupant.  After
            a move, a write addressed to the node's old path MUST NOT
            silently land on the moved-away subtree; it resolves
            against what a reader of GET .../doc sees (and 409s per
            EXT-5 Section 5.6 where the path no longer exists).
         o  List index positions (lins "idx" convenience, ldel by
            index, "elemAt") count only RENDERED elements, so index
            semantics match the JSON a client just read.
         o  This applies WITHIN one push too: later ops in a request
            observe earlier ops' effects (EXT-5 Section 5.4's shadow),
            including a "mv"'s.

      Rationale (binding): every one of these read paths resolving
      against RAW placements instead of the resolved view is a
      deterministic, convergent, and WRONG behavior -- replicas agree
      while users' writes land on invisible nodes.  Convergence
      fuzzing cannot catch this class; conformance requires the
      semantic tests of Section 7.

   4.7.  Compaction.

      "mv" is an ordinary op under the epoch barrier (EXT-5 Sections
      5.5, 5.8): a stale-epoch push is 409.  A compaction snapshot
      MUST emit each live node ONCE, at its RESOLVED LOCATION, as
      ordinary set/lins with nids preserved -- a snapshot MUST NOT
      contain "mv" ops (replay would re-run resolution against a
      partial set) and MUST NOT emit placements for moved-away list
      elements (the list re-anchoring of EXT-5 Section 5.8 is
      computed over the RENDERED elements so replayed origins are
      never dangling).  Post-compaction replay MUST reproduce the
      identical materialized JSON (EXT-5's existing gate) and the
      Section 3.5 transparency property.

   4.8.  RFC 6902 (JSON-Patch) mapping.

      Where a daemon advertises "crdtjson-move", a JSON-Patch "move"
      SHOULD map to one "mv" op (from -> path), making the mapping
      identity-preserving end-to-end.  Where it does not, the mapper
      keeps today's remove+add expansion and SHOULD surface its
      documented non-atomicity caveat.  "copy" always remains
      remove-free duplication (fresh nids are correct for copy).

5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility

   This extension adds a capability string to the ACP/1 introspection
   endpoints, per the shared convention of EXT-1 Section 7:

      GET /v1/healthz (and/or GET /v1/stats) responses gain:

         "protocol": "acp/1",
         "capabilities": [ ..., "crdtjson", "crdtjson-move", ... ]

   A daemon MUST advertise "crdtjson-move" when (a) it fully implements
   Section 4 and the Section 7 conformance bar and (b) it advertises
   "crdtjson" (EXT-5 -- move without the type is meaningless).  It is
   ALWAYS ON alongside "crdtjson" (owner decision, Section 9 -- no
   runtime flag; mixed-version safety is a release-layer concern).  A
   daemon that does NOT advertise it (a pre-move build) 404s/400s "mv"
   ops rather than silently applying them.

   A client MUST treat the ABSENCE of "crdtjson-move" as "not
   supported" and fall back to delete+reinsert with its documented
   identity-loss caveat (Section 4.8).  EXT-5 documents containing no
   "mv" ops materialize exactly as before on every daemon; documents
   whose logs CONTAIN "mv" ops require a move-capable daemon
   thereafter (downgrade is unsupported, as with any capability that
   introduces a stored op type -- Section 9).

6.  Wire API Additions

   Summary (full detail in Section 4; types in Appendix A):

      New endpoints:  NONE.

      Modified:
         POST /v1/crdt/json/ops     accepts ops with "t": "mv"
                                    (gated, Sections 5 and 9); the
                                    stored canonical form carries
                                    child/target/key-or-element/
                                    ghost tags/stamp
         GET  /v1/crdt/json/ops     returns "mv" ops in canonical
                                    NID form like any other op
         GET  /v1/healthz, /v1/stats + "crdtjson-move" capability

   Everything else -- auth, roles ("writer"+ to push, as EXT-5
   Section 7), headers, the epoch field, error model -- is unchanged.
   A "mv" costs one op against MaxOps and the writer's rate budget.
   Idempotency-Key (ACP/1 Section 6.4) MUST be honored on pushes
   containing "mv" ops, as EXT-11 Section 6 requires for undo: a
   replayed push returns the original result and MUST NOT mint a
   second placement (review F10 -- without this, an HTTP retry is a
   second logical move with a freshly derived ghost set).

7.  Determinism and High Availability

   ACP/1 Section 17 requires deterministic replicated apply.  This
   extension preserves it:

      o  The leader canonicalizes a "mv" against committed state:
         resolves child + destination, mints the op id (and list
         element id), stamps (now, actor), and stamps the OBSERVED
         ghost-purge set (tags).  Followers apply the
         canonical op verbatim; nothing is re-resolved, no clock or
         randomness is read in apply or materialize.

      o  Apply is commutative/idempotent/apply-once (Section 3.3), so
         shuffled or duplicated delivery converges (the EXT-5
         Section 4.6 contract, extended to "mv").

      o  Materialization, including the Section 4.4 validity pass, is
         a pure function of the applied op set (order-independence
         argued in 4.4); every replica returns byte-identical JSON.

      o  THE MIXED-VERSION HAZARD (the one way this extension can
         corrupt a cluster): a follower running a pre-move daemon
         applies an unknown "mv" as a silent no-op and diverges
         PERMANENTLY from move-capable peers -- while both believe
         they are healthy.  For this reason the leader MUST NOT admit
         a "mv" into the replicated log unless the operator has
         asserted cluster-wide support (Section 9).  There is no
         in-band mechanism by which Raft members learn each other's
         capabilities; the assertion is the OPERATOR'S (Section 9),
         and the refusal is the leader's (Section 5).

   Conformance bar (all REQUIRED before advertising the capability):

      (a) the EXT-5 convergence property/fuzz suite extended with
          concurrent moves and deliberately induced cycles, byte-
          identical under shuffle+dup;
      (b) a cross-replica determinism vector including "mv" (apply an
          identical stream on independent state machines, compare
          bytes), plus a leader-failover round-trip across a move;
      (c) the SEMANTIC test set -- the CONCURRENT A<->B cycle WITH
          the ghost-purge tags actually stamped (both nodes MUST
          remain visible; this is the exact interaction review F1
          caught, so the test MUST exercise retirement, not idealize
          it away), delete-after-move deletes (no fallback past a
          dead location), no superseded-ghost resurrection,
          concurrent del-vs-mv add-wins, write-at-old-path misses,
          list index arithmetic matches rendered arrays, compaction
          transparency (Section 3.5) -- because fuzzing proves
          replicas AGREE, and these prove they agree on the RIGHT
          thing.

8.  Security Considerations

   8.1.  Authority and spoofing.

      "mv" is a write: "reader" MUST be refused 403; scoped tokens
      (EXT-7) MUST pass the same scope checks as any write to the
      document.  The leader overwrites all stamps and ids and derives
      the retirement set from committed state (EXT-5 Section 9.4): a
      client cannot name tags it never observed into deletion beyond
      what "del" already allows, cannot forge stamps to win
      arbitration, and cannot reference nodes outside the addressed
      document (Section 3.7(c)).

   8.2.  Resource use.

      A "mv" is one stored op regardless of subtree size -- moves do
      NOT amplify storage.  The costs are (a) canonicalize-time
      resolution (bounded by EXT-5 Section 9.2 path/depth caps) and
      (b) the materialization-time validity pass: O(P log P) for the
      sort plus one ancestor walk per container move, each bounded
      by the ACTUAL tree height -- which, per the Section 4.5
      honesty clause, concurrency can push past MaxDepth; the true
      worst case is O(P^2) with P <= MaxOps (review F3b).  Daemons
      SHOULD memoize the resolved view between writes (collapsing
      repeated reads to O(1)) and MAY rate-limit materialized reads
      (EXT-5 Section 9.3).  Move-churn spam is rate-limited as
      ordinary writes; the MaxOps cap bounds the pathological case
      absolutely.

   8.3.  Audit.

      Moves are ordinary logged ops attributed to the authenticated
      actor; the event log's "crdt.op" records note activity as for
      every push.  History is never rewritten: a resolved-away
      (losing) move remains in the log until compaction, and the
      audit trail shows who moved what, when, whether or not the move
      won arbitration.

   8.4.  Isolation.

      Space isolation is unchanged (ACP/1 Section 7).  There is no
      per-node ACL (EXT-5 Section 3.6(f)); anyone who can write the
      document can move anything in it.  Confidential separation
      remains a separate space.

9.  Rollout Plan (Mixed-Version Clusters)

   OWNER DECISION (2026-07-23): the capability is ALWAYS ON, advertised
   alongside "crdtjson" with NO runtime flag.  Mixed-version safety is
   handled at the RELEASE layer, not per-request: the release SOP ships
   and deploys a single move-capable binary across the whole fleet, so
   a cluster is never durably split between move-capable and pre-move
   members.  (The reference deployment is single-node behind the release
   SOP; a "mv" is canonicalized and accepted whenever the structured
   store is present.)  This replaces the earlier flag-gated draft: the
   divergence hazard of Section 7 is real, but it is closed by atomic
   fleet-wide binary replacement rather than an operator flag.

      Deploy -- ship the move-capable binary to EVERY node via the
         release SOP (its deploy stage healthchecks the structured
         store and rolls back on failure).  On start, every daemon
         with the structured store advertises "crdtjson-move" and the
         leader admits "mv" ops.  Clients feature-detect per Section 5
         and use real moves (Section 4.8).

   MEMBERSHIP CHANGES (review F2, normative).  The Section 7 hazard
   still applies to JOINING and REPLACEMENT members: once "mv" ops
   exist in a cluster's log, an OLD-binary member that joins catches
   up either by log replay (it silently no-ops every "mv" -> permanent
   divergence) or by snapshot (safe only if post-compaction, which
   carries no "mv" ops, Section 4.7).  Therefore an operator MUST NOT
   add or replace a member with a binary that is not move-capable once
   move-capable binaries are deployed -- which the single-binary
   release model makes the default (every node runs the same release).
   Implementations SHOULD mark FSM snapshots taken from a move-capable
   state with a "requires: crdtjson-move" annotation that a pre-move
   binary REFUSES rather than silently applies; operators MUST NOT rely
   on compaction timing for join safety.

   Reversibility: a pre-move daemon simply lacks the endpoints' mv
   support and does not advertise the capability; ACP/1 and EXT-5 peers
   are unaffected.  DOWNGRADE of a daemon below move support after "mv"
   ops exist in a document's log is UNSUPPORTED (the op would silently
   no-op on replay); operators MUST compact first (a post-move snapshot
   contains no "mv" ops, Section 4.7) or accept the documented
   limitation.  This mirrors every stored-op capability addition.

10. Open Questions

   o  Memoization guidance: whether to specify a normative caching
      key (applied-op count) for the Section 4.4 pass or leave it to
      implementations (this document leaves it MAY).

   o  Whether a future revision should let one "mv" atomically carry
      SEVERAL children (bulk drag of a selection).  Today a multi-
      select drag is several "mv" ops in one push -- one group,
      atomic at the push level, which may be sufficient.

   o  Conflict SURFACING: a losing concurrent move is silently
      superseded (correct for convergence); whether the authority
      should optionally emit an advisory event so UIs can toast
      "your move was overridden" is open (cf. EXT-11's open question
      on surfacing no-op undos).

   o  TEXT-RANGE MOVE (Section 3.7(a)): reserved for a future
      extension; its spike must resolve range identity over the
      character sequence, likely a different mechanism (the
      per-element LWW of [K20] does not compose to ranges).

   o  Whether the EXT-12 schema validator needs a move-specific rule
      class (e.g. "children of node type X may live only under Y"),
      which moves make newly expressible; deferred to EXT-12.

Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types (JSON)

   JsonOp (changed -- one NEW op type; EXT-5 Appendix A shapes
   otherwise unchanged.  Stamps use the accepted now/actor form of
   EXT-5 owner refinement 1, which GOVERNS over EXT-5 Appendix A's
   original ts/tag shapes -- that appendix was never updated; review
   F11):

      { "t": "mv",
        "id":           OpId,      ; leader-minted; for a LIST
                                   ;   destination this is also the
                                   ;   new element id (as "lins")
        "child":        Nid,       ; the EXISTING node being moved
        "target":       Nid,       ; destination parent node

        ; destination slot -- form selected by target's KIND (4.5):
        "key":          <string>?, ; MAP destination: object key
        "index_origin": Nid?,      ; LIST destination: insert-after
                                   ;   (zero/root id = list head)

        ; ghost purge (leader-stamped, Section 4.2 rule (3); NEVER
        ; the moved child's own placements -- Revision B):
        "tags":         [ OpId ]?, ; OTHER children's live binding
                                   ;   tags at the source map slot;
                                   ;   empty when no source map slot
                                   ;   is determinable (Section 4.5)

        ; leader stamp (EXT-5 owner refinement 1):
        "now":          <int64>,   ; leader clock (unix nanos)
        "actor":        <string>,  ; authenticated writer

        ; client-convenience addressing (resolved + CLEARED by the
        ; leader; never stored):
        "from":         [ <string|int> ]?,   ; source path
        "path":         [ <string|int> ]? }  ; destination path

      A "mv" carries NO "nid", "kind", or "value": it never creates a
      node.  Unknown-field tolerance follows EXT-5 Section 3.3.

   Implementation-internal (not wire; normative effect per 4.1):
      LIST placement records gain the placement stamp:
         element id -> { child: Nid, stamp: (now, actor, op id) }

   Health/Stats (changed -- capability advertised, plus the limits
   hint per the EXT-4/EXT-11 convention; review F13):
      { ...existing fields...,
        "protocol": "acp/1",
        "capabilities": [ ..., "crdtjson", "crdtjson-move", ... ],
        "limits": { "crdtjson_max_depth": 32, ... }? }

Appendix B.  New Error Conditions

   400  Bad request: "mv" submitted to a pre-move daemon that does not
        advertise "crdtjson-move" (Section 5); unknown or root "child";
        destination form mismatching the target kind (Section 4.5);
        move would exceed the materialized-depth bound; malformed op.
   403  Forbidden: role "reader" (move is a write); scope refusal
        (EXT-7).
   409  Conflict: epoch changed (compacted -- resync, EXT-5 Section
        5.8); unresolvable "from"/"path" (with "current", EXT-5
        Section 5.6); courtesy rejection of a move into its own
        subtree as of committed state (Section 4.5).
   429  Too Many Requests: rate budget exceeded (ACP/1 Section 5.4).

   All other status codes carry the ACP/1 and EXT-5 meanings.

Appendix C.  Worked Examples

   C.1.  Reorder an array element while a peer edits it (the
         motivating case -- identity preserved).

      Document "board": {"cards":[{"text":"draft"},{"text":"ship"}]}

      Agent A drags card 0 after card 1 (path convenience form):
         > POST /v1/crdt/json/ops
         > X-ACP-Agent: claudeA
         > { "doc":"board",
         >   "ops":[ {"t":"mv","from":["cards",0],
         >            "path":["cards",1]} ] }
         < 200 { "doc":"board","total":9,"epoch":0 }
         (leader resolves the card's nid, mints a new element id
          after card 1's; the old element is SUPPRESSED derivation-
          ally -- location(card) moved -- and skipped by the
          resolved view, Section 4.2/4.6.)

      CONCURRENTLY agent B edits the same card's text, addressing
      the card's NID (its client tracked the nid from a prior sync):
         > POST /v1/crdt/json/ops
         > X-ACP-Agent: codexB
         > { "doc":"board",
         >   "ops":[ {"t":"set","target":<text-register nid of the
         >            draft card>, "value":"\"draft v2\""} ] }

      The card kept that nid across the move, so the edit follows it
      unconditionally.  NOTE (review F6): the follow guarantee is a
      property of NID-addressed writes.  A PATH write ("cards",0,...)
      resolves against committed state at ITS canonicalize time
      (EXT-5 Section 5.4) -- before the move commits it resolves to
      the draft card and follows; after, index 0 is the ship card
      and the edit lands there.  Clients wanting follow-the-node
      semantics MUST address by nid (or re-resolve paths from a
      fresh read).  Converged result:
         { "cards":[ {"text":"ship"}, {"text":"draft v2"} ] }
      The edit FOLLOWED the moved card.  Under delete+reinsert the
      edit would have landed on the deleted copy and vanished
      (Section 1.2).

   C.2.  Concurrent moves of the SAME node -- one winner, no
         duplicate.

      A moves node X under "done"; B concurrently moves X under
      "archive".  Both mvs commit; X now has two live placements.
      location(X) = the greater-stamped one (say B's).  X renders
      ONCE, under "archive"; A's placement renders nothing and is
      GC'd at the next compaction.  Both replicas, and any replica
      receiving the ops in any order, agree -- compare [DK24]
      Section 3.1 (largest-ID move wins).

   C.3.  The concurrent cycle (the literature's Figure 1) -- STAYS
         PUT.

      Start: {"A":{...},"B":{...}} (A and B siblings under root).
      A's client: mv B under A.  B's client, racing: mv A under B.
      Both canonicalize against the same committed state (each
      acyclic when checked, Section 1.3); both commit.

      Retirement interaction (the exact case review F1 caught --
      under Revision B, NEITHER move retires the other node's root
      placement: mv1's ghost purge covers only OTHER children's
      bindings at B's source slot root/"B" (there are none), and the
      moved child's own placements are never retired (Section 4.2
      rule (1)).  So root/"A" and root/"B" both remain LIVE.

      Validity pass (Section 4.4), stamps s1 < s2 (root placements
      carry earlier stamps s0/s0'):
         s0 : A -> under root           VALID
         s0': B -> under root           VALID
         s1 : B -> under A              VALID (acyclic);
                                        location(B) := under A
         s2 : A -> under B              SKIPPED -- B is inside A's
                                        subtree; cycle.  location(A)
                                        stays s0 (under root), which
                                        is LIVE -> A renders there.

      Materialized, on every replica: {"A":{...,"B":{...}}} -- the
      [DK24] Figure 1(c)/(d) outcome: one move ignored, BOTH nodes
      visible, nothing duplicated, nothing lost.  (Under the
      pre-Revision-B rule, mv2 retired root/"A" and BOTH subtrees
      vanished -- the forbidden outcome; the conformance suite MUST
      include this exact scenario with the tags actually stamped,
      Section 7(c).)

   C.4.  Delete after move deletes; concurrent delete loses to an
         unobserved move.

      (a) mv X: root/"a" -> root/"b" (stamp 20; the placement at "a",
          stamp 10, stays live but suppressed); then del root/"b"
          observes and retires the stamp-20 placement.  location(X)
          is STILL the stamp-20 placement -- location is chosen by
          VALIDITY, not liveness (Section 4.2 rule (2)) -- and it is
          now DEAD, so X renders NOWHERE.  No fallback to "a"; no
          resurrection.  Delete means delete.

      (b) mv X: "a" -> "b" racing del "a" (the del canonicalized
          before the mv committed, so it observed only the stamp-10
          tag): the del kills the old placement; the mv's NEW
          placement was never observed by the del, is live and
          valid, and is location(X).  X lives at "b" -- the
          specified add-wins outcome (Section 4.2).

   C.5.  Capability check and fallback (against a PRE-MOVE daemon).

      > GET /v1/healthz
      < 200 { "capabilities":["channels","crdtjson"] }     ; no move
      Client maps JSON-Patch "move" to remove+add (identity-lossy,
      documented).  Pushing a "mv" to that old daemon anyway:
      > POST /v1/crdt/json/ops {"doc":"d","ops":[{"t":"mv",...}]}
      < 400 { "error":"unknown op type \"mv\"" }
      A move-capable daemon (this extension) advertises "crdtjson-move"
      alongside "crdtjson" and accepts the same push (Section 9: always
      on, no flag).

Appendix D.  Research Basis and Algorithm Lineage

   This design is the identity-preserving move lineage of the CRDT
   literature, adapted to ACP's authority architecture.  The papers,
   what each contributes, and what this specification adopts:

   [S11]  Shapiro, Preguica, Baquero, Zawirski.  "Conflict-free
          Replicated Data Types."  SSS 2011.
          The CRDT foundations (strong eventual consistency;
          commutative/idempotent ops) underlying ACP/1 Section 12 and
          EXT-5 Section 4.6.

   [KB17] Kleppmann, Beresford.  "A Conflict-Free Replicated JSON
          Datatype."  IEEE TPDS 28(10), 2017.  arXiv:1608.03960.
          The nested map/list/register JSON CRDT model EXT-5 descends
          from.  Notably has NO move -- the gap this lineage then
          closes.

   [K20]  Kleppmann.  "Moving Elements in List CRDTs."  PaPoC 2020.
          THE single-element move primitive: one LWW register per
          element for its position; concurrent moves of one element
          resolve by greatest stamp.  Section 4.3's per-child
          location rule is this primitive generalized to every node.
          [K20] also shows why delete+reinsert duplicates -- the
          motivation of Section 1.2 -- and leaves RANGE moves open,
          which is why text-range move is a non-goal (Section 3.7(a)).

   [KMGB21] Kleppmann, Mulligan, Gomes, Beresford.  "A Highly-
          Available Move Operation for Replicated Trees."  IEEE TPDS
          33(7), 2021.
          The tree-move algorithm (an undo-do-redo scheme over a
          totally ordered op log; renamed RAR in [DK24] to avoid
          confusion with user-facing undo -- the same distinction
          EXT-11 draws).  Establishes the correctness frame this
          document reuses: apply moves in a total order; a move that
          would create a cycle at its turn is skipped; skipped moves
          leave the node at its prior parent.

   [DK24] Da, Kleppmann.  "Extending JSON CRDTs with Move
          Operations."  PaPoC 2024.  DOI 10.1145/3642976.3653030;
          arXiv:2311.14007.
          The direct basis.  Contributes (a) the JSON-specific
          validity rules -- largest-ID wins per moved element, no
          cycles, invalid move invisible with predecessors visible
          (its Section 3.1; our Sections 4.3-4.4); (b) ALGORITHM 1,
          the from-scratch ascending-ID validity pass with the
          IsAncestor walk -- Section 4.4 is Algorithm 1 driven by
          ACP's leader stamp order; (c) the scalar-move cycle
          shortcut (its Section 3.2; our 4.4); (d) Figure 1's outcome
          taxonomy -- this document guarantees outcome (c)/(d)
          (one move ignored) and forbids (a) cycles and (b)
          duplication.

          What this document deliberately does NOT adopt from [DK24]:
          Algorithm 2 (Restore-Apply-Reapply) and lifecycle tracking.
          Those exist because a SERVERLESS replica receives ops out
          of causal order and must incrementally re-derive validity.
          ACP's authority already imposes one total order on every
          replica (ACP/1 Section 17), so the from-scratch pass is
          run (or memoized) inside pure materialization instead --
          the same semantics at none of the incremental complexity.
          Their batch-updating observation survives trivially: one
          push's ops canonicalize together already (EXT-5 Section
          5.5).

   [B25]  Brocco.  "Introducing Support for Move Operations in Melda
          CRDT."  arXiv:2503.04811, 2025.
          Independent corroboration from the delta-state line:
          identity preservation (moves as reference updates over
          stable unique ids) is the consensus fix for duplication,
          reached separately from the Kleppmann lineage.

   Testing lineage: [DK24] Section 4.3 validates by Jepsen-style
   randomized convergence; EXT-5 already institutionalized the same
   method (its fuzz gate).  Section 7 extends that gate with moves
   and adds the SEMANTIC test class (stays-put, no-resurrection,
   resolved-view reads, compaction transparency) that pure
   convergence testing cannot see.

   Full annotated bibliographies, forward-citation survey, and the
   algorithm extraction live in the design record:
   tickets/crdt-json-research-spike-20260722/ (ALGORITHMS.md,
   CITATIONS.md, FORWARD_CITATIONS.md, SYNTHESIS) and
   tickets/crdt-json-move-20260722/ (DESIGN rev 2, review reports).

Authors' Addresses

   A. Bot (Editor)
   ab0t
   https://ab0t.com

   This extension proposal accompanies the ACP/1 specification
   (rfc/acp-1.txt), the ACP/EXT-5 structured-CRDT extension, and the
   reference implementation distributed at
   https://github.com/ab0t-com/acp .
