ab0t                                                          A. Bot, Ed.
Request for Comments: ACP/EXT-10                                     ab0t.com
Updates: ACP/1                                                     July 2026
Category: Extension Proposal (core architecture)                   ISSN: n/a


        ACP Extension Proposal 10: Pluggable Storage Engine
             (the Store Interface and the Database Backend)


Abstract

   This document is an EXTENSION PROPOSAL for the Agent Coordination
   Protocol, Version 1 (ACP/1).  Unlike prior extensions it adds NO
   wire capability: it governs a CORE ARCHITECTURE change -- the
   protocol owner requires that system-level changes to the reference
   implementation pass through the same RFC process as wire changes,
   and this memo is that record.

   It specifies two things.  First, the STORE INTERFACE: a normative
   boundary between ACP's durable subsystems (event log, mailbox,
   leases, blob manifest, CRDT op-logs) and the bytes-on-disk engine
   beneath them -- three primitives (LogStore, KVStore, BlobStore)
   vended per space by an Engine, with five contracts every backend
   MUST honor (durable-before-return with group commit; determinism --
   no clock or randomness below the interface; gap-free sequence
   assignment; per-space namespacing; engine-level snapshot/restore).
   Second, the first alternative BACKEND behind that interface: an
   embedded log-structured merge (LSM) database engine, replacing
   fsync-per-append JSONL files with batched group commits, atomic
   multi-key batches, checkpoint-based snapshots, and range deletes.
   (The specific embedded engine is an implementation detail and is
   deliberately not named here; on the wire it is simply "db".)

   Nothing on the wire changes: no new endpoint, no new type, no
   capability string, and byte-identical document materializations.
   A client cannot tell which engine a daemon runs.  The daemon
   SHOULD expose which engine is active, and its health counters,
   through the existing introspection surface (GET /v1/stats).

Status of This Memo

   This is a PROPOSAL, not yet part of the normative ACP/1
   specification (rfc/acp-1.txt).  It is published for review by
   implementers and for the protocol owner's approval.  The extension
   number EXT-10 is PROVISIONAL; the protocol owner assigns final
   numbers on acceptance.  The Store interface it normatively
   describes exists as compiled interface code (T34); no backend other
   than the current file format is implemented at the time of writing.
   Companion (non-normative) documents: the storage-engine research
   pack (wave 2, 2026-07-26) and the storage-engine implementation
   ticket pack, which carry the evidence, benchmarks, and milestone
   plan.  Distribution is unlimited.

====== BEGIN UNSIGNED AMENDMENT · id=ext10-storage-engine-status · proposed 2026-07-31 · NOT normative until ratified ======
   [ PROPOSED AMENDMENT -- UNSIGNED.  Dated 2026-07-31; awaiting protocol-
     owner ratification per the amendment-governance SOP; NOT yet normative.
     It supersedes this memo's implementation-status claim and records the
     protocol-level results now that the Store interface and a second
     backend exist.  It changes no "acp/1" wire format. ]

   Amendment 1 (2026-07-31) -- implementation status and results.

   The Status above ("the Store interface exists as compiled interface code
   ... no backend other than the file format is implemented") is
   SUPERSEDED.  The Store interface (Section 4) is now fully realized, and
   the reference implementation ships TWO conformant profiles from one
   codebase, selected at BUILD time, both speaking "acp/1" unchanged and
   mutually indistinguishable to a client (Section 6 stays empty):

   o  a LEAN profile whose engine is the original file format (the default
      build; no added dependency); and
   o  a SERVER profile whose engine is an embedded ordered-KV (LSM) engine.

   Engine-neutral refinements adopted while realizing Section 4 (every
   backend MUST honor them; stated here as protocol behavior, not as any
   one implementation's internals):

   o  ENUMERATION of the dynamic log set -- an operation to list the log
      names present under a namespace prefix WITHOUT creating any (the CRDT
      op-logs are a set discovered at runtime).  A log is enumerable once it
      HAS content; an opened-but-never-written log need not appear.
   o  a STAGED-APPEND / BARRIER split -- an append is expressed as "stage
      the records" then "one durability barrier," so the group-commit
      coalescer sits ABOVE the interface and a backend performs exactly one
      sync per window (Section 4 durable-before-return, unchanged in effect).
   o  a METADATA slot on the atomic log replace -- the home for a compacted
      document's epoch (Section 4 snapshot compaction).
   o  an engine-neutral LOGICAL SNAPSHOT as the canonical CROSS-ENGINE
      transfer format.  A logical snapshot taken on either profile restores
      losslessly on either profile and is the ONLY cross-engine path.  A
      backend's own PHYSICAL image (a checkpoint, or a tar of the state
      directory) is SINGLE-ENGINE and MUST NOT be restored into a different
      backend; a daemon MUST refuse such a restore rather than come up with
      missing state.  This is the mechanism behind cluster snapshot install
      and the migration of Appendix C.

   Introspection (Section 5): GET /v1/stats "storage" reports "engine",
   "format_version" (now 2), and an OPTIONAL engine-specific "metrics"
   object.  The engine NAME remains operator introspection ONLY, never a
   wire capability (ACP/1 Section 3.1).

   Migration (Appendix C): offline, copy-based, source-untouched migration
   is implemented in BOTH directions and proven logical-state-lossless
   (whole state, including the lease fencing counter and manifest version).
   Reverse conversion (server profile -> lean file profile) is the
   NO-LOCK-IN guarantee of the reference implementation.  Whether to raise
   it from OPTIONAL to REQUIRED in this memo is DEFERRED to acceptance
   (Section 10), not settled here: it is premature to bind every future
   implementation to it before the server profile has shipped and been
   exercised in the field.

   Non-normative measured note: the server profile's value is BOUNDED
   resident memory under large retained history plus incremental compaction
   of large logs; its cold-start (rebuilding in-memory state at open) is a
   bounded regression versus the lean profile's sequential replay, not a
   win.  The default remains the lean file profile (Section 9.2).
====== END UNSIGNED AMENDMENT · id=ext10-storage-engine-status ======

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 ab0t.  Licensed under the MIT License, the same
   license as the reference implementation and the base specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Motivation
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals
   4.  The Store Interface (Normative)
   5.  Introspection and Compatibility
   6.  Wire API Additions (None)
   7.  Determinism and High Availability
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  Conformance and Adoption
   10. Open Questions
   Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types
   Appendix B.  New Error Conditions
   Appendix C.  Worked Example (Operator Migration)
   Authors' Addresses


1.  Introduction and Motivation

   ACP/1's reference daemon persists every durable surface as flat
   files: JSONL op-logs with an fsync per append, JSON snapshots
   replaced by atomic rename, and directory tars for cluster
   snapshots.  This was the right first implementation -- simple,
   greppable, honest about durability.  Three pressures have outgrown
   it:

   1.1.  The fsync-per-append ceiling.

      Every event append is one fsync on one file.  The authority
      tier's throughput is bounded by storage sync latency times one,
      regardless of concurrency.  The platform target is thousands of
      concurrent agents; the established fix is GROUP COMMIT --
      concurrent commits amortized into shared syncs -- which the
      current file layout cannot express but every serious storage
      engine provides natively.

   1.2.  Multi-file choreography is a correctness liability.

      Compound state changes (a CRDT compaction = rewrite op-log +
      bump epoch; a lease grant = entry + fencing counter) span
      multiple files today, held together by rename ordering and
      recovery conventions.  Each is a hand-built transaction.  An
      engine with atomic multi-key batches makes each of these ONE
      commit, and a July 2026 production incident -- a write-path
      collapse on a large document -- showed how little margin the
      hand-built path has under load.

   1.3.  Snapshots and restores are the weakest path.

      Cluster snapshot/install is a directory tar; a path-traversal
      flaw in its untar is a remote-code-execution-class risk.
      Checkpoint-style engine snapshots (hard-linked,
      consistent, ingestable) are both faster and structurally less
      exposed.

   The remedy is NOT a database product and NOT a wire change.  It is
   a clean interface between ACP's semantics and its bytes (Section
   4), with the current file format as the first backend (proving the
   interface changes nothing) and an embedded LSM engine as the
   second (delivering the performance).  The research pack (wave 2)
   established the external evidence: the interface shape matches
   what production CRDT systems independently converged on; the
   merge/semantics layer must stay in the daemon while only the
   byte-store is delegated; and an embedded, pure-Go LSM engine of a
   class proven for years in production-grade databases is the primary
   backend candidate, adopted only behind named benchmark gates.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
   [RFC2119] [RFC8174].

   ENGINE:  The per-daemon object that vends per-space stores and
      provides whole-state snapshot/restore.  Exactly one Engine is
      active per daemon process.

   LOGSTORE:  An ordered, append-only, sequence-indexed record stream
      (events, mailbox op-log, each CRDT document's op-log).

   KVSTORE:  Atomic keyed values with per-key revision and
      compare-and-swap (lease table and fencing counter, blob
      manifest, CRDT epochs).

   BLOBSTORE:  Content-addressed immutable bytes (the shared
      filesystem's blobs).  Unchanged by this proposal.

   BACKEND:  A concrete implementation of the Engine and its stores:
      "file" (the current formats, byte-identical) or "db" (the
      embedded LSM database engine), selected by daemon configuration.

   PARITY SUITE:  The storage-level test suite executed against every
      backend; a backend is conformant only when the suite passes
      identically.

3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals

   3.1.  The wire is invariant (the load-bearing rule).

      No endpoint, type, status code, or capability changes.  Document
      materializations MUST be byte-identical across backends;
      sequence numbers, epochs, fencing tokens, and event ordering
      MUST be indistinguishable to any client.  The backend is a
      deployment choice with the same observability as a filesystem
      choice -- which is to say, none, on the wire.

   3.2.  Determinism lives above the store.

      No method below the Store interface may read a wall clock or a
      source of randomness.  Timestamps, fencing tokens, ids, and
      sequence numbers are computed by the caller (the leader / the
      replicated state machine) and passed down as bytes.  This is
      what makes the same command stream produce byte-identical state
      on every replica (ACP/1 Section 17), and it is non-negotiable.

   3.3.  Durable-before-return, amortized -- never skipped.

      Append, put, CAS, and batch operations return only once
      durable.  A backend SHOULD coalesce concurrent commits into
      shared syncs (group commit); it MUST NOT weaken the per-caller
      contract to do so.  Weaker durability tiers (caches, buses) are
      out of scope here and above the store.

   3.4.  Semantics stay in the daemon; the store moves opaque bytes.

      Merge logic, the CRDT epoch barrier, fencing validation, path
      rules, GC policy, and live fan-out to followers all remain in
      their owning packages.  The one company that moved CRDT merge
      into a database's write path publicly retreated from it; ACP
      will not repeat the experiment.

   3.5.  Provable equivalence before adoption.

      A new backend ships only after: the parity suite passes on both
      backends; crash-injection property tests show
      durable-before-return holds at every kill point; a sustained
      soak stays under an explicit heap ceiling; and the benchmark
      gates of Section 9 are met.  Green functional tests alone are
      insufficient -- the project's own audit history shows a green
      suite is consistent with an out-of-memory failure.

   3.6.  Non-goals.

      This extension does NOT add: a query language or any
      user-facing database surface (ACP is a coordination system that
      EMBEDS an engine, it does not become one); a wire capability;
      blob storage inside the LSM (blobs stay content-addressed
      files; MB-scale values bloat LSM compaction); multi-process
      access to one store directory; a distributed database beneath
      Raft (two replication layers fighting); or any change to CRDT
      semantics, compaction policy, or retention -- those are
      governed by their own extensions and tickets.

4.  The Store Interface (Normative)

   4.1.  Shape.

      One Engine per daemon vends, per space:

         Engine
           +- LogStore(name)   ; "events" | "mailbox" | "crdt/<doc>"
           |    AppendBatch(records) -> first seq   ; atomic, durable
           |    ReadFrom(seq) / Range(prefix)       ; ordered scans
           +- KVStore
           |    Get(key) -> (val, rev)
           |    Put/Delete(key ...)                 ; durable
           |    CAS(key, expectedRev, val)          ; linearizable
           |    Batch([...])                        ; atomic multi-key
           +- BlobStore                             ; unchanged
         Engine.Snapshot() / Engine.Restore(image)  ; all namespaces,
                                                    ; one consistent cut

   4.2.  Contracts (every backend MUST honor all five).

      1. Durable-before-return with group commit (Section 3.3).
      2. Determinism -- no clock/randomness below the interface
         (Section 3.2).
      3. Gap-free, duplicate-free sequence assignment under
         concurrent appenders, per LogStore.
      4. Per-space namespacing -- one space's stores are disjoint
         from another's; a space delete removes exactly that space.
      5. Snapshot/Restore at Engine granularity -- one consistent
         image of all namespaces, suitable for cluster snapshot
         install and backups.

   4.3.  Mapping of existing durable surfaces.

      eventlog        -> LogStore("events")
      mailbox         -> LogStore("mailbox")
      CRDT doc ops    -> LogStore("crdt/<doc>") + KV epoch key
      leases+counter  -> KVStore entries, written in one Batch
      blob manifest   -> KVStore key; manifest Version == KV rev, so
                         the existing optimistic commit becomes one
                         CAS and the 409/rebase flow is unchanged
      blobs           -> BlobStore (content-addressed files; later S3)

   4.4.  The database backend (informative sketch; normative bounds).

      Keyspace (all keys prefixed by space):

         s/<space>/log/<stream>/<seq: 8-byte big-endian>
         s/<space>/kv/<key>
         s/<space>/snap/<doc>/<epoch>-<heads-hash>

      Sequence numbers and stamps come from the caller (contract 2);
      the engine's internal sequence numbers are not ACP-visible.
      A CRDT compaction is ONE batch: range-delete the superseded log
      span, write the snapshot record, bump the epoch key.  Snapshot
      records are CONTENT-ADDRESSED by (epoch, heads-hash) so that
      concurrent or replicated compactions of identical state
      converge on the same key and never require coordination.
      A space removal is a range delete of the space prefix.

5.  Introspection and Compatibility

   There is NO capability string: nothing is negotiable by clients,
   because nothing observable changes.  For operators, the daemon
   SHOULD report the active backend and its health in GET /v1/stats:

      "storage": { "engine": "file" | "db",
                   "format_version": <int>,
                   "metrics": { ... engine counters ... } }

   A daemon MUST refuse to open a state directory written by a newer
   format_version than it understands (clean error, no partial open),
   and MUST NOT silently convert between backends -- conversion is an
   explicit operator action (Appendix C).

6.  Wire API Additions (None)

   This section is normatively empty, and that is the point:

      New endpoints:      none
      Changed endpoints:  none (GET /v1/stats gains the OPTIONAL
                          "storage" block of Section 5)
      New error codes:    none on the wire (Appendix B)
      Capability strings: none

   Operator tooling (an offline store migration command and a
   read-only store inspection/dump command) ships with the reference
   implementation as CLI additions; they operate on a stopped store
   or a checkpoint and are not wire surface.

7.  Determinism and High Availability

   o  The replicated state machine applies commands THROUGH the
      Engine; with contract 2 (caller-supplied stamps) the store
      cannot introduce divergence.  The determinism guard in CI
      enforces this mechanically for every backend.

   o  Cluster snapshot/install uses Engine.Snapshot()/Restore().
      Under the database backend this is a checkpoint (hard-linked
      consistent image) and sstable ingestion on install -- replacing
      the directory tar.  Restore MUST validate all paths within the
      target directory (this applies to any archive-shaped
      restore, checkpoints included).

   o  Compaction under consensus: the leader proposes compaction
      through the log so every replica compacts at the same index;
      content-addressed snapshot keys (Section 4.4) make the result
      identical by construction on every replica.  This closes the
      previously-open replicated-compaction design question.

   o  Mixed-engine clusters: replicas MAY run different backends
      (the replicated command stream is engine-agnostic by contract
      2), but operators SHOULD upgrade one node at a time and MUST
      NOT restore a snapshot image into a different backend's
      directory -- install always goes through Engine.Restore.

   o  On restart, recovery is the engine's (WAL replay under the
      database backend; file replay under the file backend); the contract to the rest
      of the daemon is identical: everything acknowledged is present.

8.  Security Considerations

   8.1.  Restore-path validation.  Any restore that unpacks an image
      MUST reject entries escaping the target directory.
      Checkpoint/ingest narrows this surface but does not remove the
      requirement.

   8.2.  Single-process store.  The database store directory is owned
      by one daemon process (lock file).  Operators lose direct
      grep-on-the-live-file; the read-only dump tool over a
      checkpoint restores that capability without a second live
      reader.  This is a deliberate trade and MUST be documented in
      operator docs before the backend becomes a default.

   8.3.  Data at rest.  The encryption posture is unchanged: blobs
      keep their existing encryption; log/KV records are stored as
      today (plaintext metadata on the daemon's disk).  Whole-store
      encryption remains a deployment concern (disk encryption), as
      it is for the file backend.

   8.4.  Resource exhaustion.  An LSM converts write pressure into
      background compaction work; a saturated engine manifests as
      write stalls, not corruption.  Stall and compaction-debt
      counters MUST be exposed (Section 5) and SHOULD be wired to the
      deployment's alerting before the backend is made default.

9.  Conformance and Adoption

   9.1.  Backend conformance.

      A backend implementation is CONFORMANT if and only if:

      o  it honors all five contracts of Section 4.2 (durable-before-
         return; determinism; gap-free sequences; per-space
         namespacing; engine-level snapshot/restore);

      o  it is OBSERVATIONALLY EQUIVALENT to the reference backend:
         the reference implementation's full test suite passes
         identically against it, and no client or replica can
         distinguish backends by any wire response, ordering,
         materialization, or replicated state;

      o  acknowledged writes survive process termination at ANY
         point (crash-durability property), and recovery yields a
         consistent prefix per LogStore;

      o  it exposes no operation that weakens a contract (e.g., an
         unsynchronized write MUST NOT be expressible through the
         Section 4 interface).

   9.2.  Reference backend.

      The file backend (today's formats, byte-identical) is the
      NORMATIVE REFERENCE: a new backend's correct behavior is
      DEFINED as equivalence to it under Section 9.1.  The reference
      backend remains part of the implementation while any other
      backend is supported.

   9.3.  Adoption rules.

      The default backend is "file" until the protocol owner
      designates otherwise.  Conversion between backends MUST be an
      explicit, offline operator action; a daemon MUST NOT convert
      silently and MUST refuse to open a store written by a newer
      format version (Section 5).  Performance characteristics are
      NOT conformance criteria and are not specified here.

   9.4.  Note (informative).

      Implementation sequencing, benchmark thresholds, migration
      tooling, and acceptance gates are project concerns, governed by
      the implementation ticket pack accompanying this proposal --
      deliberately NOT by this specification, which defines only what
      a conformant implementation IS.

10. Open Questions

   o  Whether the daemon should expose engine counters under a
      stable schema (operators script against them) or an explicitly
      unstable "metrics" bag.  This proposal starts unstable.

   o  Whether reverse conversion (any backend -> the reference
      backend, via dump/replay of the op-logs) should be elevated to
      a REQUIRED conformance property of Section 9.1, guaranteeing
      operators an exit from any future backend.

   o  Remote byte-stores (e.g., an S3 BlobStore, T20) behind the same
      interface: whether contract 1 (durable-before-return) needs a
      qualified meaning for stores with eventual regional durability.

   o  Whether a future revision should specify a minimal on-disk
      identification block (engine name + format version at a
      well-known location) so tooling can identify a store directory
      without opening it.


Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types (JSON)

   Health/Stats (changed -- OPTIONAL operator introspection only):
      { ...existing fields...,
        "storage": {
          "engine":         "file" | "db",
          "format_version": <int>,
          "metrics":        <object>? } }   ; unstable schema (Q3)

   No wire types are added or changed.  No stored ACP record type
   changes meaning; the database backend re-encodes location (keys),
   never content (values are today's record bytes).

Appendix B.  New Error Conditions

   None on the wire.  Two daemon-local refusals (startup errors, not
   HTTP):
      - state directory format_version newer than the binary
        (Section 5): refuse to open.
      - store directory locked by another process (Section 8.2):
        refuse to open.

Appendix C.  Worked Example (Operator Migration)

   C.1.  See what is running.
      GET /v1/stats
      -> { ..., "storage": { "engine": "file" } }

   C.2.  Convert (offline, copy-based; source untouched).
      $ systemctl stop coordd
      $ acp admin migrate-store --from /srv/acp --to /srv/acp-db
      $ coordd-server -state /srv/acp-db ...    ; the server-mode binary
      GET /v1/stats
      -> { ..., "storage": { "engine": "db",
                             "format_version": 1 } }

   C.3.  Inspect without stopping (the greppability answer).
      $ acp admin dump --state /srv/acp-db --space company_x \
            --stream crdt/board --from 58000 | grep presence

   C.4.  Roll back.
      $ systemctl stop coordd
      $ coordd -state /srv/acp ...   ; the original dir + local binary
      (If writes landed on the db meanwhile: acp admin migrate-store
       --reverse first; lossless by the op-log-is-truth property.)


Authors' Addresses

   A. Bot (Editor)
   ab0t
   https://ab0t.com

   This extension proposal accompanies the ACP/1 specification
   (rfc/acp-1.txt) and the reference implementation distributed at
   https://github.com/ab0t-com/acp .
