ab0t                                                          A. Bot, Ed.
Request for Comments: ACP/EXT-15                                     ab0t.com
Updates: ACP/1                                                     July 2026
Category: Extension Proposal (EARLY DRAFT)                         ISSN: n/a


        ACP Extension Proposal 15: Identity-Preserving RANGE MOVE
                  for the Text/Sequence CRDT (DRAFT)


   [ Editor's notes.
     (1) The extension NUMBER "15" is EARMARKED by the protocol owner
         (2026-07-23) and remains formally PROVISIONAL until assigned
         on acceptance.
     (2) THIS IS AN EARLY DRAFT.  The commissioned deep research pass
         LANDED 2026-07-23 (tickets/crdt-text-move-20260722/:
         LITREVIEW.md, OPTIONS_ext15.md, per-paper extractions 1-7)
         and is FOLDED IN: the open-problem status is triangulated
         for 2026 (Appendix D.3), the overlap rule (Section 4.4) and
         the new edge-membership knob (Section 4.4a) are research-
         informed, and the remaining [RESEARCH-PENDING] tags mark
         only what is genuinely still open -- the Section 4.5
         state-cost representation (per the research, THE hard part)
         and the D.2 implementation-survey gap (Loro/Automerge/Yjs
         not yet fully surveyed; only the YATA-move exploration
         was).  One design input arrived from the JSON sibling after
         this draft was first cut: EXT-14 Revision B's F1 lesson
         (Section 3.2a). ]


Abstract

   This document is an EXTENSION PROPOSAL for the Agent Coordination
   Protocol, Version 1 (ACP/1).  It specifies one additive,
   backward-compatible feature: an identity-preserving MOVE for the
   TEXT/SEQUENCE CRDT of ACP/1 Section 12 -- relocating a contiguous
   RANGE of elements (a paragraph, a bullet point, a block of lines)
   to a new position without destroying the moved elements' identity.

   Today a text move is a delete-run plus an insert-run of fresh
   element ids (the Section 12 client surface is a whole-document
   diff, which can express nothing else).  Under concurrency this
   loses data: an edit made inside a paragraph while a peer reorders
   that paragraph anchors to the OLD position ids and is stranded or
   lost.  The sibling extension ACP/EXT-14 closes the analogous gap
   for the structured (JSON) CRDT and names this residual text-CRDT
   loss mode as an explicit non-goal pointing here.

   Moving a SINGLE list element is a solved problem in the literature
   (one last-writer-wins position register per element).  Moving a
   RANGE is, as of the 2020 state of the art, an explicitly OPEN
   problem in serverless settings.  This proposal's central argument
   is that ACP's authority changes the problem: with a leader that
   canonicalizes every mutation against committed state and a Raft
   total order over operations, a range move can be expressed as ONE
   ATOMIC BATCH of identity-preserving single-element moves, and the
   serverless edge cases (concurrent overlapping range moves; edits
   inside a moving range) reduce to arbitration rules ACP/EXT-14 has
   already established (leader-total-ordered stamps; stays-put
   conflict semantics).  The feature is negotiated by a new
   capability string, "crdt-text-move", with the same operator-gated
   mixed-version rollout as EXT-14.  The wire version stays "acp/1".

Status of This Memo

   This is an EARLY-DRAFT PROPOSAL, not yet part of the normative
   ACP/1 specification and not yet ready for acceptance review.  It
   is published so the team can review the architecture DIRECTION
   while the commissioned literature review completes, and so the
   research agents have a concrete target to confirm or refute.
   Sections 4.4, 4.5, and Appendix D carry [RESEARCH-PENDING] hooks.

   Lineage and sequencing: this proposal depends on nothing in
   ACP/EXT-5, but its DESIGN inherits from ACP/EXT-14 (identity
   preservation, LWW location, stays-put semantics, the operator-
   gated rollout) and its BUILD is sequenced AFTER EXT-14 lands.
   Per-actor undo remains ACP/EXT-11 and is NOT bundled here (owner
   ruling 2026-07-23; one feature per extension).  The extension
   number EXT-15 is owner-earmarked, provisional until acceptance.
   The base protocol version string remains "acp/1".  Distribution is
   unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 ab0t.  Licensed under the MIT License, the same
   license as the reference implementation and the base specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Motivation
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals
   4.  Range Move (Candidate Design)
   5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility
   6.  Wire API Additions
   7.  Determinism and High Availability
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  Rollout Plan (Mixed-Version Clusters)
   10. Open Questions (the research agenda)
   Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types (DRAFT)
   Appendix B.  New Error Conditions (DRAFT)
   Appendix C.  Worked Examples
   Appendix D.  Research Basis [RESEARCH-PENDING sections marked]
   Authors' Addresses


1.  Introduction and Motivation

   1.1.  Text reorder loses concurrent edits today.

      The Section 12 text CRDT is character-granular: every element
      is one rune with a stable id, inserted after an origin element.
      Its only client surface is a whole-document diff, so "move this
      paragraph up" reaches the authority as delete-run + insert-run
      OF FRESH IDS.  A peer's concurrent edit inside that paragraph
      anchors to the OLD element ids -- which are now tombstones far
      from the re-inserted text -- and the edit is stranded at the
      old position or silently lost.  This is the anomaly documented
      in [K20] Figure 4 (Appendix D): the edit's surrounding context
      moved; the edit did not follow.

   1.2.  EXT-14 names this gap and points here.

      ACP/EXT-14 Section 3.7(a) closes identity-preserving move for
      the JSON CRDT and explicitly documents the residual text loss
      mode ("acp crdt sync" paragraph reorder) as out of its scope,
      reserved for this extension.  Block-STRUCTURED documents get
      block reorder from EXT-14 already (blocks as EXT-5 list
      elements referencing text docs); [K20] Section 4 proves that
      recipe still does not remove the need for range moves: SPLIT
      and JOIN of blocks move character ranges BETWEEN text objects.

   1.3.  Single-element move is solved; range move is open --
         and ACP's authority is the lever.

      [K20] gives the single-element algorithm (one LWW position
      register per element; fresh destination position ids) and
      states plainly that RANGE moves have "no known algorithm" in
      the serverless model, naming the killers: concurrent moves of
      partially overlapping ranges, and destinations inside ranges
      that are themselves moving.  Those killers are artifacts of
      NO-AUTHORITY replication: replicas receive the conflicting
      range moves in different orders and must converge anyway.  ACP
      replicas do not: the leader canonicalizes every mutation
      against committed state, stamps a strict total order, and Raft
      delivers one sequence to every replica (ACP/1 Sections 8, 17).
      This proposal therefore reduces a range move to ONE ATOMIC,
      LEADER-ORDERED BATCH of single-element moves and inherits
      EXT-14's arbitration discipline for the residual races.  The
      claim "the authority makes the open problem tractable" is the
      load-bearing bet of this draft, and it is exactly what the
      commissioned research pass must pressure-test
      [RESEARCH-PENDING].

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
   in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
   [RFC2119] [RFC8174].

   This document uses the ACP/1 definitions (spaces, auth, roles, the
   Section 12 text CRDT: element, element id, origin, tombstone,
   epoch, compaction) and, for design lineage only, the EXT-14
   definitions (placement, location, stamp, stays-put, observed
   retirement) without restating them.

   RANGE:  A contiguous run of live elements [first..last] in a text
      document's sequence order, addressed by the STABLE ELEMENT IDS
      of its endpoints (never by integer offsets on the wire).

   POSITION REGISTER:  Per-element LWW register holding the element's
      current position anchor; writing it moves the element ([K20]
      Section 3).  The register's stamp is leader-assigned
      (now, actor, op id), as in EXT-14.

   MOVE BATCH:  The canonical form of one range move: the ordered set
      of per-element position-register writes the leader expands a
      range-move request into, applied atomically as one op group.

   REDIRECTION:  The required semantics for an edit concurrent with a
      move of the range containing its anchor: the edit integrates
      relative to its anchor element AT THE ANCHOR'S NEW POSITION
      ([K20] Figure 5, the "desired outcome").

3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals

   3.1.  Identity preservation, lifted from EXT-14.

      A moved element keeps its id; only its position register
      changes.  Everything follows from this: concurrent edits
      anchored to moved elements redirect (Section 2), concurrent
      moves of the same element collapse to one LWW winner, and
      delete+reinsert duplication is impossible for moves expressed
      through this extension.

   3.2.  Stays-put conflict semantics (EXT-14 Section 4.4 inherited).

      Where two moves conflict irreconcilably, the losing move is
      IGNORED and the affected elements REMAIN at their previous
      valid positions.  A conflict resolution MUST NOT hide, delete,
      or duplicate text.  (The precise overlap rule is Section 4.4
      and is an open design decision -- but whatever is chosen must
      satisfy this principle.)

   3.2a. The EXT-14 Revision-B lesson is BINDING here (2026-07-23).

      EXT-14's independent review found its draft retirement rule
      jointly unsatisfiable with stays-put: retiring the moved
      thing's OWN prior placement destroyed the fallback the
      conflict loser needed, vanishing data (its F1).  The corrected
      rule -- DERIVED SUPPRESSION: location chosen by validity, a
      thing renders only where its location is live, no fallback
      past a deleted winner, and a move NEVER retires the moved
      thing's own prior position -- carries over here verbatim: a
      position-register write MUST NOT tombstone or retire the
      element's prior position record; the old position is
      out-arbitrated derivationally, and deletion semantics come
      only from real deletes.  Any ext-15 design that eagerly
      "cleans up" source positions will reproduce EXT-14's F1 bug in
      sequence form.  (EXT-14 Sections 4.2-4.4, Revision B.)

   3.3.  Move is data, not mechanism.

      Position-register writes are ordinary appended, leader-stamped,
      replicated ops; apply stays commutative/idempotent/apply-once;
      resolution is a pure function of the applied op set.  No
      history rewriting; no second replication path.

   3.4.  The diff surface stays; a move surface is added.

      The Section 12 whole-document diff client flow is untouched
      (and remains move-blind).  Range move is expressed through a
      NEW explicit request (Section 6); how clients DETECT move
      intent (an editor verb vs diff heuristics) is a client concern
      outside this protocol (Section 10).

   3.5.  Compaction stays observably transparent.

      The EXT-14 Section 3.5 invariant applies verbatim: snapshots
      emit elements at their RESOLVED positions, position registers
      survive replay, and no future op sequence can distinguish a
      compacted from an uncompacted replica.

   3.6.  Non-goals.

      This extension does NOT add: (a) JSON/structured move -- that
      is EXT-14; (b) UNDO -- that is EXT-11 (owner ruling 2026-07-23:
      not bundled; note EXT-11's own open question already reserves
      text-CRDT undo, whose inverse rules this extension's position
      registers would simplify the same way EXT-14 Section 3.6
      simplifies undo-of-move); (c) rich-text FORMATTING spans
      (Peritext-class machinery -- adjacent, not move); (d) cross-
      document range moves (split/join across text docs is REAL and
      is deliberately staged as an open question, Section 10, not
      silently promised); (e) any change to Section 12's existing
      ins/del semantics for non-move edits.

4.  Range Move (Candidate Design)

   [ This section is the architecture the owner asked to see drafted.
     4.1-4.3 rest on evidence already in hand ([K20] + the EXT-14
     arbitration discipline).  4.4 and 4.5 are genuinely open and
     carry the research hooks. ]

   4.1.  Element position registers (the [K20] retrofit).

      Every live element of a text document gains a POSITION
      REGISTER.  Creation (ins) initializes it implicitly to the
      insertion position at zero extra cost; only elements that have
      BEEN moved carry an explicit register value (sparse
      representation -- an unmoved document stores nothing new).
      Moving an element writes its register with a fresh leader-
      minted destination position anchor ([K20]'s fresh-destination
      rule, which EXT-14 D8 mirrors); concurrent moves of one element
      resolve by the leader-stamped LWW rule; the vacated position is
      treated as nonexistent.  Integration order among elements at
      the same anchor follows the Section 12.1 origin/id rule
      unchanged.

   4.2.  A range move is one atomic MOVE BATCH.

      The client names a range by its endpoint ELEMENT IDS plus a
      destination anchor (an element id after which the range lands,
      or the document head).  The LEADER, against committed state:

         (a) resolves the range to the ordered run of live elements
             [first..last] (400 if the endpoints are not both live,
             not in order, or the destination anchor lies INSIDE the
             range);
         (b) mints fresh destination position anchors preserving the
             run's internal order;
         (c) expands to per-element position-register writes -- the
             MOVE BATCH -- stamped as ONE op group and proposed
             atomically (all-or-nothing, exactly as an EXT-5 push
             group).

      Raft's total order serializes whole batches: two "concurrent"
      range moves are two batches with disjoint stamp intervals, so
      the serverless nightmare of interleaved overlapping range
      moves cannot occur BETWEEN batches.  The residual race is the
      canonicalize-vs-commit window (two batches both canonicalized
      against the same committed state -- the same window EXT-14
      Section 1.3 handles), which Section 4.4's arbitration rule
      resolves deterministically at materialization.

   4.3.  Redirection of concurrent in-range edits (the payoff).

      An insert concurrent with a move of the range containing its
      origin anchors to an ELEMENT ID whose identity survived the
      move.  It therefore integrates next to that element at the
      element's NEW position -- the [K20] Figure 5 desired outcome --
      with NO new merge machinery: identity preservation plus the
      existing origin rule delivers it.  A delete concurrent with a
      move tombstones its element wherever that element now is.
      Conformance MUST include the Figure-4-scenario semantic test:
      edit-inside-range concurrent with range move lands INSIDE the
      moved range at its new location.

   4.4.  Overlap arbitration.  [research folded 2026-07-23; the
         DECISION remains open for the design phase]

      Research input (LITREVIEW G1; extraction 3-sypytkowski-yata-
      move.md): the one practitioner attempt at YATA-range-move
      found some overlapping concurrent moves have NO reconciling
      merge -- "in some cases the only sensible solution would be to
      cancel/revert the effect of one or both move operations."
      That is independent support for a stays-put-style rule (a
      losing batch is IGNORED, deterministically, by stamp order)
      over any attempt at merging overlapping ranges.  Also
      relevant: sequences cannot form parent cycles, so EXT-14's
      IsAncestor machinery is replaced by a simple RANGE-OVERLAP
      check (OPTIONS_ext15.md) -- ext-15's validity pass is simpler
      than ext-14's, not harder.

      When two batches were canonicalized against the same committed
      state and their ranges OVERLAP, per-element LWW (each element
      follows its greatest-stamped register write) is deterministic
      and convergent but can SPLIT a range: some elements follow
      batch 1, the overlap follows batch 2's later stamps.  Candidate
      rules, to be settled by the research pass + team review:

         (a) ELEMENT-WISE LWW (split allowed) -- simplest, always
             converges, text is never lost, but a range can end up
             divided across two destinations;
         (b) BATCH-WISE stays-put -- treat the batch as the conflict
             unit: the earlier-stamped batch wins wholly; the later
             batch is ignored wholly where it overlaps (EXT-14
             Section 4.4 lifted from nodes to batches; requires
             batch identity in the resolution pass);
         (c) leader courtesy-serialization -- the leader rejects (409
             + current state) a batch whose range intersects a batch
             admitted since the client's epoch/cursor, forcing a
             client rebase (cheapest; turns the race into a normal
             conflict; does not cover multi-leader failover windows
             and so needs (a) or (b) underneath regardless).

      DRAFT position: (c) as the front door plus (b) as the
      deterministic floor, with (a) rejected FOR SHIPPING (a
      silently split paragraph is astonishing).  Research
      concurrence and one nuance: the pass found NO better-analyzed
      2024-2026 rule (Appendix D.3), and OPTIONS_ext15.md
      recommends PROTOTYPING (a) element-wise first in the design
      phase -- it is just the batched [K20] primitive plus stays-put
      and validates all the machinery -- while treating atomic-
      range-wins (b) as the delta to specify before acceptance.
      Adopted: prototype (a), ship (c)+(b).  The (b) floor requires
      batch identity in the canonical ops (Appendix A "batch").

   4.4a. Edge membership (NEW knob, from the research pass).

      When an insert lands concurrently AT A BOUNDARY of a moving
      range (just before "first" or just after "last"), does it
      travel with the range or stay?  Peritext solved exactly this
      membership question for static formatting spans with
      before/after ANCHOR SIDES on stable character ids (extraction
      4-litt2022-peritext.md); ext-15 MUST adopt the same device so
      boundary behavior is a SPEC'D CHOICE, not an accident of
      integration order: a range is (first, side) .. (last, side),
      and the leader stamps the sides into the canonical batch.
      DRAFT default: begin-side = "before first" EXCLUSIVE growth,
      end-side = "after last" EXCLUSIVE (boundary inserts stay) --
      matching typical editor cut/paste expectations; the design
      phase may flip the default with user testing.

   4.5.  State and representation cost.  [RESEARCH-PENDING -- and,
         per the landed pass, THE hard part of ext-15]

      Research input (LITREVIEW G5): the authority orders moves but
      does not shrink their state; the YATA-move exploration
      additionally required "remember[ing] all previous move
      operations within the range," which is incompatible with our
      compaction budget.  No published work gives a run/segment-
      granular representation.  This decision, not concurrency, is
      where ext-15's novelty and risk concentrate.

      A register per CHARACTER is the naive cost.  Mitigations to be
      validated: sparse registers (only moved elements pay,
      Section 4.1); RUN-LENGTH GROUPING (one register write covering
      a contiguous id run, expanded logically -- the wire batch then
      carries O(runs) not O(chars)); or restricting v1 move
      granularity (line/block boundaries).  The chosen representation
      MUST keep the batch a pure function of committed state and
      MUST keep Appendix A's wire shape stable or version it here
      before acceptance.

   4.6.  Compaction.

      Snapshots (Section 12.5 / rga SnapshotOps) already re-anchor
      live elements in visible order; under this extension the
      snapshot MUST emit elements in RESOLVED order (position
      registers applied) and MAY then drop superseded register
      history, preserving element ids -- after which the moved order
      IS the base order and the registers are empty again.  Epoch
      barrier semantics are unchanged; Section 3.5's transparency
      property gates conformance.

5.  Capability Negotiation and Backward Compatibility

   This extension adds a capability string to the ACP/1 introspection
   endpoints, per the shared convention of EXT-1 Section 7:

      GET /v1/healthz (and/or /v1/stats) responses gain:

         "protocol": "acp/1",
         "capabilities": [ ..., "crdt-text-move", ... ]

   A daemon MUST advertise "crdt-text-move" only when it implements
   Sections 4, 6, and 7 and the operator has enabled the Section 9
   gate.  A daemon that does not advertise it MUST reject move
   requests with 400 naming the capability -- never silently ignore
   them.  A client MUST treat absence as "not supported" and fall
   back to today's diff behavior (with its documented loss mode).
   Documents containing move ops thereafter require a move-capable
   daemon (downgrade unsupported until compacted, as EXT-14
   Section 9).  This capability is independent of "crdtjson" /
   "crdtjson-move": a text-only deployment may ship it alone.

6.  Wire API Additions (DRAFT -- shapes provisional until 4.5 lands)

   Summary:

      New:
         POST /v1/crdt/move        ; range move request (Appendix A):
                                   ;   {doc, first, last, after,
                                   ;    epoch?} -> {doc, total,
                                   ;   epoch} | 400 | 409
      Modified:
         POST /v1/crdt/ops         ; the replicated stream gains the
                                   ;   canonical position-register
                                   ;   write op (leader-expanded;
                                   ;   clients do not author it
                                   ;   directly in v1)
         GET  /v1/crdt/ops         ; returns those ops in canonical
                                   ;   form to syncing clients
         GET  /v1/healthz, /v1/stats + "crdt-text-move"

   Auth/roles/headers/epoch/error conventions follow ACP/1 Sections
   5-6 and Section 12; a move is a WRITE ("writer"+).  The move
   request counts against rate limits by its EXPANDED batch size
   (cf. EXT-5 Section 9.2's expanded-count rule).

7.  Determinism and High Availability

   o  The leader canonicalizes a move request against committed
      state only: range resolution, fresh anchors, stamps, batch
      grouping (Section 4.2).  Followers apply canonical ops
      verbatim; nothing re-resolves; no clock/randomness in apply or
      materialize (ACP/1 Section 17).

   o  Position-register resolution is a pure function of the applied
      op set (LWW over totally-ordered stamps; plus the Section 4.4
      rule once fixed), so materialized text is byte-identical on
      every replica -- the same argument, and the same conformance
      method, as EXT-14 Section 7.

   o  MIXED-VERSION HAZARD (identical to EXT-14's): a pre-move
      follower silently no-ops the register-write op and diverges
      permanently.  The leader MUST NOT admit move ops unless the
      operator has asserted cluster-wide support (Section 9).

   Conformance bar before advertising the capability: (a) the
   Section 12 convergence/fuzz suite extended with concurrent moves
   incl. overlapping ranges under shuffle+dup; (b) a cross-replica
   determinism vector + leader-failover round-trip across a move;
   (c) the SEMANTIC set: Figure-4 redirection, stays-put overlap
   outcome (per the 4.4 rule chosen), no-duplication, no-loss,
   compaction transparency.

8.  Security Considerations

   o  Amplification: one small request expands to a batch bounded by
      range length; daemons MUST bound range size per request and
      SHOULD count expanded size against rate budgets (Section 6).
      Move-churn spam is ordinary write spam.

   o  Spoofing: stamps, anchors, and batch membership are leader-
      minted; clients cannot forge winners (ACP/1 Section 5.2).

   o  No new read surface, no new isolation surface: space boundary
      unchanged; audit via the ordinary op log (losing moves remain
      visible until compaction, as EXT-14 Section 8.3).

9.  Rollout Plan (Mixed-Version Clusters)

   Identical in shape to EXT-14 Section 9, with its own flag:

      Step 1 -- UPGRADE every node (feature dormant).
      Step 2 -- ENABLE -enable-crdt-text-move on every node (the
                operator's cluster-wide-support assertion; default
                OFF; single-node MAY default on).
      Step 3 -- ADVERTISE "crdt-text-move" + leader admits moves;
                clients feature-detect.

   While off: 400 on move requests; no move op ever enters a log a
   current member cannot apply.  Reversibility and the compact-
   before-downgrade rule follow EXT-14 Section 9 verbatim.

   SEQUENCING (owner-set): EXT-14 ships first; this extension's
   BUILD does not start before EXT-14 lands, and its acceptance
   review does not start before the research pass and Section 4.4/
   4.5 are resolved.

10. Open Questions (= the research agenda for the in-flight pass)

   o  [4.4] The overlap rule: does any 2024-2026 result give a
      better-analyzed batch-conflict semantics than the (c)+(b)
      draft position?  (Check: movable-list implementations -- Loro;
      replay architectures -- EG-Walker; any successor to [K20]'s
      open-problem statement.)

   o  [4.5] Representation: run-length grouped registers vs sparse
      per-element vs block-granular v1; measured state cost on
      realistic documents.

   o  Cross-text-doc range move (split/join of blocks, [K20]
      Section 4's residual case): in-scope for a REVISION of this
      ext, a separate ext, or the block-recipe documentation
      forever?  Needs product signal (coboard/liquid-UI) as much as
      research.

   o  Client surface: explicit editor verb (acp crdt move) only, or
      also a diff-side move DETECTOR (risk: heuristic misfires
      moving the wrong range)?  v1 draft says verb-only.

   o  Text-CRDT undo (EXT-11's reserved open question): position
      registers make undo-of-move an LWW write-back here too;
      confirm EXT-11's inverse table extends cleanly when EXT-11 is
      promoted.

   o  Whether "crdt-text-move" should also advertise a limits hint
      (max range length) alongside the capability, per the EXT-4
      limits convention.

Appendix A.  New and Changed Data Types (DRAFT -- provisional until
             Section 4.5 resolves; do not freeze)

   TextMoveRequest (new -- body of POST /v1/crdt/move):
      { "doc":   <string>,
        "first": Id,               ; first element of the range
        "last":  Id,               ; last element (order-checked)
        "after": Id | null,        ; destination anchor element
                                   ;   (null = document head); MUST
                                   ;   NOT lie inside [first..last]
        "epoch": <uint64>? }       ; optimistic; 409 on mismatch

   TextMoveResult (new):
      { "doc": <string>, "total": <uint64>, "epoch": <uint64>,
        "moved": <int> }           ; elements in the batch

   Op (Section 12 op stream -- ONE new canonical op type, leader-
   authored only in v1):
      { "t": "mv",
        "id":     Id,              ; op id (leader-minted)
        "elem":   Id,              ; the element whose position moves
        "anchor": Id,              ; fresh destination anchor
        "now":    <int64>,         ; leader stamp
        "actor":  <string>,
        "batch":  <string>? }      ; batch id (needed iff rule 4.4(b)
                                   ;   is adopted; else omitted)
      [RESEARCH-PENDING: if run-length grouping (4.5) is adopted,
       "elem" generalizes to a run descriptor; revisit before freeze.]

   Health/Stats (changed):
      { ..., "capabilities": [ ..., "crdt-text-move", ... ],
        "limits": { "crdt_text_move_max_range": <int> }? }

Appendix B.  New Error Conditions (DRAFT)

   400  Bad request: capability not enabled (error text MUST name
        "crdt-text-move"); unknown/dead endpoint elements; endpoints
        out of order; destination anchor inside the range; range
        exceeds the advertised max.
   403  Forbidden: role "reader" (move is a write); scope refusal
        (EXT-7).
   409  Conflict: epoch changed (resync, Section 12.5); or -- if
        rule 4.4(c) is adopted -- range intersects a batch admitted
        since the client's cursor ("rebase and retry", with current
        state).
   429  Too Many Requests: expanded batch exceeds the rate budget.

Appendix C.  Worked Examples

   C.1.  The motivating case ([K20] Figures 4-5): move a bullet
         while a peer edits inside it.

      Doc: "* Bacon\n* Milk\n".  B moves the range covering
      "* Milk\n" before "* Bacon\n":
         > POST /v1/crdt/move
         > { "doc":"list.md", "first":<id of '*'>,
         >   "last":<id of '\n'>, "after":null }
         < 200 { "doc":"list.md", "moved":7, ... }
      Concurrently A edits "Milk" -> "Soy milk" (ordinary diff ops
      anchored to the 'M'/'i' element ids).
      Converged, every replica: "* Soy milk\n* Bacon\n" -- the edit
      REDIRECTED into the moved range (Section 4.3).  Today's
      behavior (diff-only) strands "Soy m" near the old position:
      the exact anomaly this extension removes.

   C.2.  Concurrent moves of the same range -- one winner.

      A moves lines 5-9 after line 20; B concurrently moves lines
      5-9 after line 2 (both canonicalized against the same state).
      Under draft rule 4.4(c): the later batch is refused 409 and B
      rebases.  In the failover window where both committed, the
      4.4(b) floor applies: the earlier-stamped batch wins wholly;
      the later is ignored; the range appears ONCE, after line 20,
      on every replica.  Nothing splits, duplicates, or vanishes.

   C.3.  Capability check and fallback.

      > GET /v1/healthz
      < 200 { "capabilities":["channels","crdtjson"] }
      No "crdt-text-move": the editor greys out structural drag for
      text docs (or documents the lossy fallback); POSTing anyway
      yields 400 naming the capability.  After the Section 9
      procedure the capability appears.

Appendix D.  Research Basis  [to be extended by the in-flight pass]

   EVIDENCE IN HAND (grounding this draft; full extractions in
   tickets/crdt-text-move-20260722/RESEARCH_SPIKE.md):

   [K20]  Kleppmann.  "Moving Elements in List CRDTs."  PaPoC 2020.
          DOI 10.1145/3380787.3393677.  Read in full; archived in
          the design ticket.  Contributes: the single-element
          algorithm (Section 4.1 here); the fresh-destination-
          position rule; the duplication argument against
          delete+reinsert; Figure 4/5 (the redirection requirement,
          Section 4.3 here); the verbatim open-problem statement for
          ranges ("At present, there is no known algorithm for
          performing such moves of ranges of elements") with its
          named edge cases -- which Section 4.2's authority argument
          targets; and the proof that block-structuring does NOT
          obviate range moves (split/join, Section 3.6(d)/Section 10
          here).

   [DK24] Da, Kleppmann.  "Extending JSON CRDTs with Move
          Operations."  PaPoC 2024.  The JSON sibling's basis (see
          EXT-14 Appendix D); its Algorithm-1-in-total-order insight
          is what EXT-14 ports and what Section 4.4(b) would lift
          from nodes to batches.  Does NOT treat text ranges.

   [KMGB21] Kleppmann et al.  "A Highly-Available Move Operation for
          Replicated Trees."  IEEE TPDS 33(7), 2021.  Unordered
          trees; the stays-put lineage.  Does NOT treat sequences.

   [B25]  Brocco.  "Introducing Support for Move Operations in Melda
          CRDT."  arXiv:2503.04811.  Element relocation between
          containers; corroborates identity preservation; does NOT
          treat ranges.

   Initial diligence (2026-07-23, shallow web pass recorded in the
   ticket): no post-2020 solution to sequence-range move surfaced;
   adjacent-but-different: Peritext (formatting spans over stable
   character ids -- anchoring machinery, not relocation), EG-Walker/
   replay architectures (no move), arXiv:2203.10285 (tree moves).

   Deep-pass results (landed 2026-07-23; full record in
   tickets/crdt-text-move-20260722/ -- LITREVIEW.md, OPTIONS_ext15.md,
   extractions 1-7, CITATIONS.md, FORWARD_CITATIONS.md):

      D.1  Forward-citation sweep: 15 works citing [K20], ~5 citing
           [DK24]; NOT ONE delivers a contiguous-character-range
           move.  Every "move" found is single-element (K20,
           Rinberg21 Array-CRDTs), tree/structural (KMGB21, Nair22,
           Grove'25, DK24, Melda-move'25), or grid row/column
           (AegisSheet'26).  The frontier text CRDTs punt
           explicitly: Peritext lists text move as future work;
           Fugue "omit[s] operations to mutate or move elements";
           Eg-walker is insert+delete only.  New sources over this
           draft's first cut: Lord 2019 splicing (fixed boundary-id
           endpoints "move around through other splices"; the
           hash-id fix has exponential tombstones -- G2 evidence)
           and Sypytkowski's YATA-move (Section 4.4's cancel/revert
           quote; the unbounded in-range move-history state cost --
           Section 4.5).
      D.2  Implementation survey: PARTIAL [RESEARCH-PENDING].  The
           YATA-move exploration is extracted (3-*.md); Loro's
           movable list, Automerge's move status, and Yjs
           discussions were NOT reached this pass and remain a
           to-do before the design phase concludes (they are the
           likeliest place a shipped element-move semantics exists;
           no range move is expected there either, per D.1).
      D.3  VERDICT: [K20]'s open-problem statement STILL STANDS in
           2026 -- triangulated three ways (crdt.tech/papers
           curated index; the D.1 sweep; the frontier papers'
           explicit punts).  No literature-native range algorithm
           exists to compare against; Section 4.2's authority-
           native design is therefore novel work, with the
           serverless open problem narrowed (per LITREVIEW) to the
           Section 4.4 semantic CHOICE plus the Section 4.5 state
           cost.
      D.4  Options analysis folded: (c) block-recipe-now ranked
           first as the immediate posture (zero protocol cost,
           ext-14 §3.7(a) already documents it); (b) authority-
           native range move = the recommended design-phase target
           (this document's Section 4); (a) single-element retrofit
           valuable only as (b)'s primitive layer; (d) literature-
           native adoption unavailable.  The owner's chosen option
           is recorded in Status of This Memo on acceptance.

Authors' Addresses

   A. Bot (Editor)
   ab0t
   https://ab0t.com

   This extension proposal accompanies the ACP/1 specification
   (rfc/acp-1.txt), the ACP/EXT-14 structured-CRDT move extension
   (its JSON sibling), and the reference implementation distributed
   at https://github.com/ab0t-com/acp .
