ab0t                                                          A. Bot, Ed.
Request for Comments: ACP/EXT-37                                     ab0t.com
Updates: (none -- client consumer)                          September 2026
Category: Extension Proposal (client conformance)                  ISSN: n/a


        ACP Extension Proposal 37: Mountable ACP
     -- A Native Userspace Filesystem Mount (with Platform Loopback
        Fallbacks) That Consumes the Frozen acp/1 Wire, Adds No Wire,
        and Makes a Shared, Live, Multi-Agent Space "Just Files"


Abstract

   This document is an EXTENSION PROPOSAL for the Agent Coordination
   Protocol, Version 1 (ACP/1).  It specifies MOUNTABLE ACP: a CLIENT
   that presents an ACP space (or a prefix of one) as an ORDINARY
   DIRECTORY of the host operating system, so that an agent, a person,
   or any program collaborates with a fleet by reading and writing
   files -- "ls", "cat", "grep", an editor, a build -- with no
   knowledge that a network, a protocol, or another agent is involved.

   The mount is a CONSUMER.  It adds NO wire: every byte it moves rides
   the existing acp/1 HTTPS surfaces -- the content-addressed blobs and
   compare-and-swap manifest of ACP/1 Section 11 for a CAS-mode region,
   the EXT-28 CRDT directory tree and CRDT file endpoints for a
   realtime-mode region, the EXT-31 mode lookup that tells it which,
   the ACP/1 Section 8 event log for liveness, and the EXT-32 "acp://"
   address as its mount target.  It advertises no capability of its
   own and needs none to run; it FEATURE-DETECTS the capabilities the
   daemon already advertises.

   What the memo makes NORMATIVE is the CLIENT CONTRACT an independent
   mount implementation must honour so that two mounts from two vendors,
   against one daemon, give an agent the SAME truth: (1) a CACHE-HONESTY
   INVARIANT -- a cache between the user and the authority MAY be stale
   but MUST NEVER LIE, and a negative answer ("does not exist") is never
   cached; (2) ONE WRITE PATH -- every destructive change is expressed as
   changes in ONE ordinary commit (CAS) or ONE structural batch
   (realtime), so the bulk guard, the conflict anchor and the lease
   refusal cover every syscall uniformly; (3) CONFLICT THROUGH POSIX --
   errno is one integer and cannot carry the loser's bytes, so a
   conflict lands as a SIDECAR by default with a status surface carrying
   the rich record, or as ESTALE under an opt-in policy, and NEVER as
   EIO; (4) SAFETY -- the bulk-change guard (EXT-34) is measured at the
   crossing unlink so an "rm -rf" stops at the first refused call having
   buffered nothing bulk, and everything under the mount stays
   recoverable (EXT-33 history, EXT-28 trash); (5) SECURITY -- no raw
   token in any path, argument, mount option or loopback listener.

   Platform reach is stated honestly per platform: full on Linux; on
   macOS through a user-installed FUSE package with TTL-only cache
   honesty, or through a loopback NFS server the built-in client mounts;
   on Windows through a loopback WebDAV server; and NO mountpoint on a
   locked-down host without a FUSE device, where the SDK and CLI remain
   the surface.  Nothing changes the wire version "acp/1".

Status of This Memo

   ACCEPTED as a numbered CLIENT-CONFORMANCE extension: the protocol
   owner ratified numbering it EXT-37 on 2026-09-18 (Section 17).  It is
   published as a Request For Comment on the client contract and is NOT
   part of the normative ACP/1 specification -- it consumes acp/1 and
   changes nothing in it.  The extension number EXT-37 is PROVISIONAL;
   the protocol owner assigns final numbers on acceptance.  It is a CLIENT-CONSUMER extension in the sense of EXT-32
   (the "acp://" scheme) and EXT-23 (the client packages): it proposes
   NO amendment to ACP/1, defines NO new endpoint, NO new replicated
   command, NO new capability string, and NO change to any existing
   surface.  It CONSUMES, unchanged: ACP/1 Section 8 (the event log),
   Section 11 (blobs and the CAS manifest), Section 12 (collaborative
   documents); EXT-28 (the CRDT directory tree, the realtime structure);
   EXT-31 (filesystem mode, the CAS/realtime toggle and the mode
   lookup); EXT-32 (the "acp://" address it mounts); and, where
   advertised, EXT-33 (version-pinned reads and history), EXT-34 (the
   bulk-change guard, whose Section 5.5 already binds "a mount"), EXT-27
   (read scoping), and EXT-22 (scoped watch).  It is the home for the
   client obligations those memos place on "a mount" without a memo of
   its own.

   The design it transcribes was ratified by the protocol owner on
   2026-09-18 (the four decisions of Section 4); the first increment
   (a read-only CAS mount) exists as a reference implementation at the
   time of writing; every later increment is UNBUILT.  The memo's
   normative content is the CLIENT CONTRACT; where it names a reference
   implementation choice it says so and marks it INFORMATIVE.  The owner
   ratified numbering it as a client-conformance extension on
   2026-09-18 (Section 17).  The base protocol version string remains
   "acp/1".  Distribution is unlimited.

   Published 2026-09-18 (draft).

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 ab0t.  Licensed under the MIT License, the same
   license as the reference implementation and the base specification.


Table of Contents

   1.  Motivation -- "just use files"
   2.  Conventions and Terminology
   3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals
   4.  The Four Ratified Decisions (normative choices)
       4.1.  Substrate: a pure userspace filesystem with the three
             cache levers
       4.2.  Packaging: a separate binary in its own module
       4.3.  Conflict UX: sidecar by default, ESTALE on request,
             never EIO
       4.4.  Platform reach: Linux, macOS, loopbacks, no third FUSE stack
   5.  Addressing and the Mount Model
       5.1.  The mount target
       5.2.  Pre-flight before the kernel
       5.3.  Backend selection by mode; mode change under a live mount
       5.4.  The barrier and the single write path
       5.5.  The handle model (close-to-open)
       5.6.  Lifecycle
   6.  VFS Operation to ACP Mapping
       6.1.  The mapping table (CAS and realtime)
       6.2.  The errno table
       6.3.  Operations that do not map cleanly (honest degradation)
   7.  The Cache-Honesty Invariant (the negative-cache hazard,
       generalised)
       7.1.  The invariant
       7.2.  The rules
       7.3.  The per-platform honesty bound, and where it is shown
       7.4.  Page-cache posture (recorded deviation)
   8.  Conflict Through POSIX
       8.1.  errno is one integer; the conflict record is not
       8.2.  The two policies
       8.3.  The status surface
       8.4.  Realtime through POSIX
   9.  Safety Under the Mount
       9.1.  The bulk guard, measured at the crossing unlink
       9.2.  Recover from anything under the mount
       9.3.  No second write path; no durable authority state
       9.4.  Never block; the disconnected posture
   10. Platform Reach
   11. Honest Limits
   12. Security Considerations
   13. Interaction with Other Extensions
   14. Capability Negotiation, Rollout and Distribution
   15. Section 17 Determinism Compliance
   16. Conformance Ladder (the merge bar per increment)
   17. Open Questions
   Appendix A.  The Control Directory Schema
   Appendix B.  Worked Examples
   Authors' Addresses


1.  Motivation -- "just use files"

   1.1.  Every other surface asks the agent to learn something.

      ACP's surfaces are good, and each asks the agent to hold some
      concept that is not the task: the MCP tools ask which verb; the
      CLI asks push versus pull versus a CRDT sync, and what a lease is;
      an SDK asks for a language binding and a program.  The dogfood
      runs measured this: even a good typed surface costs an agent some
      of its scarce context on the protocol rather than on the work.
      The mount asks the agent to learn NOTHING.  It already knows how
      to read and write files -- the most universal skill any agent,
      person or program has.  "cat spec.md"; "echo ... > src/x.py".
      Done.  Ranked by how much each surface removes, the mount removes
      ALL of it: the only concept left is "files in a folder", which the
      agent already has.  There is nothing below "it's just files".

   1.2.  Every existing tool becomes collaborative, unchanged.

      Because the mountpoint is a real directory, an agent's ENTIRE
      toolchain becomes multi-agent-collaborative for free: "grep -r",
      "find", "sed", a build system, a linter, a test runner, an editor,
      a language's standard file I/O, "git" on the mounted tree, a
      notebook reading a shared data file.  None of these knows ACP
      exists.  You do not port your tools to ACP; ACP appears
      underneath your tools.  For a HETEROGENEOUS fleet -- a Python
      agent, a shell script, a compiled data tool, a cron job, an MCP
      harness -- the mount is the universal interop surface: anything
      that can touch a path collaborates.

   1.3.  Live collaboration through the filesystem.

      On a realtime-mode region (EXT-31 selecting EXT-28), a teammate's
      change shows up in the mounted directory as it happens: a created
      file appears in the next "ls"; concurrent edits to one live
      document CONVERGE, so the reader sees the merged bytes and never a
      merge step; a folder reorganised by three agents at once is simply
      the merged structure.  The agent gets a live shared drive with no
      watch loop, no polling, no subscription code.

   1.4.  The floor stays safe, so the agent can act boldly.

      The substrate's guarantees hold under the mount: a wrong overwrite
      or delete is undoable (EXT-33 history; EXT-28 trash); a runaway
      "rm -rf" is caught by the bulk-change guard (EXT-34) before it
      leaves the mount; a same-file race is merged (CRDT) or surfaced
      honestly (a sidecar), never a silent clobber.  The biggest hidden
      tax on an autonomous agent -- fear of an irreversible mistake --
      is removed, and that is precisely why the mount is safe to give
      to a swarm.

   1.5.  Why this needs a memo.

      Three memos already place obligations on "a mount" with nowhere
      to hold them: EXT-34 Section 5.5 (a mount refuses bulk
      synchronously), EXT-31 Section 4.5 (a mount dispatches by mode and
      re-reads it on wrong_fs_mode), EXT-28 Section 5.6 (the client
      SHOULD expose trash recovery).  A kernel adds four caches the
      shipped client facade never had, and on some platforms removes the
      lever to invalidate them (Section 7).  And two mounts from two
      implementers against one daemon must show an agent the SAME truth:
      the same sidecar convention, the same status schema, the same
      loser-name display, the same "never EIO for a conflict".  That is
      a CLIENT CONFORMANCE contract, and this memo is it.


2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119]
   [RFC8174].

   This document uses the definitions of ACP/1 (space, manifest, path,
   commit, base_version, blob, content hash, event, seq, lease,
   read_prefix), EXT-28 (node, placement, TRASH, live node, the
   name-collision disambiguation "<name>~<nodeId>" with the doubled
   literal "~", RESTORE), EXT-31 (CAS mode, realtime mode, region,
   fs_mode, wrong_fs_mode, fs.mode.changed), EXT-32 (ACP URI,
   connection address, the "v=" pin, the ironclad no-token rule),
   EXT-33 (version-pinned read, checkpoint, restore), EXT-34 (net loss,
   the delete and overwrite tallies, threshold, bulk disposition,
   bulk_confirm, 428 bulk_confirm_required, 403 bulk_denied) and EXT-27
   (read scope, no-oracle) without restating them.  POSIX terms (inode,
   dentry, attr, page cache, errno, close-to-open) are used as in the
   host operating system's documentation.

   MOUNT:  A running client process that presents one ACP region --
      a space, or a prefix of one -- at a MOUNTPOINT of the host
      filesystem, translating kernel VFS operations into acp/1 requests.

   VIEW:  The kernel-free semantic core of a mount: the held manifest or
      tree snapshot, the OVERLAY, the blob cache, the handle pins, and
      the BARRIER.  Every front-end (a native FUSE adapter, a loopback
      NFS or WebDAV server) is a thin errno/protocol shim over ONE view;
      filesystem decisions live in the view, never in a front-end.

   OVERLAY:  The view's set of not-yet-landed local changes: the
      PENDING buffer UNION every QUEUED or IN-FLIGHT barrier batch,
      newest wins.  A path whose first write is in flight is PRESENT in
      the overlay.  All of lookup, readdir, stat and open consult it.

   BARRIER:  The view's Flush: the single operation that converts the
      overlay into ONE acp/1 write -- one commit (CAS) or one structural
      batch (realtime) -- and reports the outcome.  fsync, flush-on-
      close and release-of-last-dirty-handle all invoke it.

   HANDLE PIN:  The content identity (a blob hash, or a document name)
      a file handle bound at open; reads through the handle serve that
      content for the handle's life (close-to-open consistency).

   CROSSING CALL:  The unlink, rmdir or rename that would make the
      pending batch cross an EXT-34 threshold if buffered.

   SIDECAR:  A sibling file "<name>.conflict-<agent>-<timestamp>"
      holding the losing byte set of a content conflict, created by the
      barrier and visible in the tree.

   STATUS SURFACE:  The mount's structured JSON log plus the OPTIONAL
      control directory "<mountpoint>/.acp/" (Section 8.3, Appendix A).

   FRONT-END:  The protocol the operating system's kernel or client
      speaks to the mount: native FUSE (Linux, macOS), a loopback NFSv3
      server, or a loopback WebDAV server.

   NEGATIVE ANSWER:  A "does not exist" -- ENOENT from lookup, an absent
      name in readdir, a failed access -- as opposed to a POSITIVE answer
      carrying attributes or bytes.


3.  Design Principles and Non-Goals

   3.1.  A consumer, never a wire.  The mount is a CLIENT of the public
      SDK over the frozen "acp/1" wire.  It MUST NOT require a daemon
      change to function, MUST NOT introduce an endpoint, and MUST NOT
      hold durable authority state: everything durable is on the daemon,
      and a mount that dies loses only its unflushed buffer (which the
      status surface and the sidecar discipline keep visible).

   3.2.  A cache may be stale; it may never lie.  Section 7.  This is
      the negative-cache hazard (HZ-ACPDB-13) generalised from the
      client facade to every cache a kernel adds.  Negative answers are
      never cached.  Positive staleness is bounded and shown.

   3.3.  One write path.  Every destructive change from every syscall
      is expressed as changes in ONE ordinary commit or ONE structural
      batch (Section 5.4).  There is no second write path, so the bulk
      guard, the conflict anchor and the lease refusal cover unlink,
      rmdir, rename, truncate and write uniformly.

   3.4.  Never a silent clobber.  A content conflict is surfaced --
      sidecar or errno -- never resolved by last-writer-wins (Section
      8).  Both byte sets survive on the daemon under the default
      policy.

   3.5.  Refuse, never ignore.  An operation the mount cannot map
      (hard link, symlink, exchange-rename, device node) returns
      ENOTSUP; it is never silently accepted and dropped, because a
      tool that believes a rename-exchange succeeded will then destroy
      data on the strength of it.

   3.6.  Honest per platform.  The mount's guarantees differ by front-
      end and kernel, and the memo states each rather than claiming the
      best case everywhere (Sections 7.3, 10, 11).

   3.7.  Non-goals.  This memo does NOT: define a new resource, address
      or capability (EXT-32 addresses; the daemon advertises); define
      the realtime structure or its recovery (EXT-28); define the mode
      or its transition (EXT-31); define the bulk policy (EXT-34) or
      history (EXT-33) -- it consumes them; make the mount an offline
      store (Section 9.4); provide POSIX byte-range locking across
      mounts (Section 6.3; leases are the cross-agent exclusion); or
      surface the non-file primitives (mailbox, leases, presence,
      channels) -- those remain on the MCP, CLI and SDK surfaces.  The
      mount is the FILE surface taken to its OS-native conclusion.


4.  The Four Ratified Decisions (normative choices)

   The protocol owner ratified these four on 2026-09-18.  Each is
   stated as the PROPERTY a conformant mount MUST have, followed by the
   reference implementation's choice (INFORMATIVE -- an implementation
   detail the ticket records, not a spec requirement).

   4.1.  Substrate: a pure userspace filesystem with the three cache
         levers.

      A native mount MUST be built on a userspace-filesystem substrate
      that (a) gives the mount control of the kernel's NEGATIVE-lookup
      lifetime (so Section 7's "never cache a negative" is enforceable,
      not hoped for), (b) lets the mount set the entry and attribute
      lifetime PER LOOKUP (so a pending or dirty path can carry a zero
      lifetime while a clean one carries a short one), and (c) where the
      kernel supports it, lets the mount INVALIDATE an entry or announce
      a deletion on an event (so a teammate's change reaches the kernel
      before any lifetime expires).  The substrate MUST NOT require a C
      toolchain or a dynamically linked helper: the reference
      distribution is a single static binary per platform and the mount
      MUST keep that property.  The substrate MUST be maintained and
      protocol-current, because the kernel boundary is a forever
      surface.

      Reference choice (informative): the reference mount uses the
      actively maintained pure-language FUSE library that exposes all
      three levers at its high-level API, pinned to an exact tag with
      a checksum in the module file; the previously considered library
      was rejected as dormant (no commits since early 2023, macOS
      support dropped in 2019); a second maintained pure-language
      library is the recorded fallback.  A kext-less macOS FUSE
      alternative that ignores cache lifetimes and offers no
      invalidation is NOT supported for a live tree (Section 10).

   4.2.  Packaging: a separate binary in its own module.

      The mount MUST be packaged so that the DAEMON'S dependency set is
      unchanged by it: the kernel-facing substrate lives in the mount's
      own module, the mount consumes the PUBLIC SDK (never the daemon's
      internals), and it ships as a separate executable the reference
      CLI discovers and execs ("acp mount" / "acp umount", sibling-then-
      PATH discovery, a clear install message if absent).  This is the
      core/client independence rule made mechanical: the mount is FORCED
      to be a client.  Cost accepted: one more artifact in the release
      matrix, and a second module to keep aligned with the SDK.

      Reference choice (informative): module "acp/mount" building
      "acp-mount", built with the same static, trimmed, cross-compiled
      flags as every other binary, for Linux and macOS targets.

   4.3.  Conflict UX: sidecar by default, ESTALE on request, never EIO.

      A mount MUST implement BOTH conflict policies of Section 8.2 and
      MUST default to the SIDECAR policy.  Under either policy the rich
      conflict record MUST reach the status surface (Section 8.3).  A
      mount MUST NOT map a content conflict to EIO.  Rationale: errno
      cannot carry bytes, cannot name the other writer, and is DISCARDED
      by the kernel on release (the common no-fsync path of "cp", "git
      checkout", a build tool) -- so an errno-only policy would silently
      lose the loser's bytes when the mount dies.  The sidecar keeps both
      byte sets on the daemon and makes the conflict visible in the tree
      to "ls", editors and agents; it is the "conflicted copy"
      convention users already know from consumer sync clients.
      Tradeoff accepted: under the default a program sees success while
      the path holds the OTHER writer's bytes and a sibling appears --
      surprising once, mitigated by the status surface and (on Linux)
      an inotify event.

   4.4.  Platform reach: Linux, macOS, loopbacks, no third FUSE stack.

      Reach MUST be delivered in this order and stated this honestly:
      (1) native FUSE on Linux (full cache honesty: lifetimes AND
      invalidation); (2) native FUSE on macOS through the user-installed
      FUSE package (lifetimes only -- that kernel extension offers no
      invalidation), which the mount MUST NOT bundle or auto-install
      (its licence forbids bundling with commercial software) and MUST
      detect and explain; (3) a LOOPBACK NFSv3 server the macOS built-in
      client mounts, for a macOS host without a kernel extension; (4) a
      LOOPBACK WebDAV server over loopback HTTPS with a per-session
      credential, for Windows (built into every edition); (5) NO third-
      party Windows FUSE stack unless the owner explicitly accepts its
      licence (copyleft with a paid commercial exception); (6) a locked-
      down Linux host without the FUSE device gets NO MOUNTPOINT -- the
      SDK and CLI are the surface there, and the mount MUST say so
      rather than degrade silently.  Both loopbacks MUST sit on the same
      view as the native adapter (Section 2, VIEW).


5.  Addressing and the Mount Model

   5.1.  The mount target.

      A mount is addressed by an EXT-32 ACP URI naming a space root or a
      collection within it:

         acp mount acp://<authority>/<space>/[<prefix>/] <mountpoint>
                   [--conflict=sidecar|error] [--allow-bulk]
                   [--control-dir] [--daemon] [--attr-ttl <d>]
                   [--allow-other]

      o  The URI MUST be a collection (a trailing slash: the space root
         or a directory) -- a FILE cannot be a mountpoint's root and
         MUST be refused with the collection form named.
      o  A "v=<version>" pin (EXT-32 Section 3.4; EXT-33) yields a READ-
         ONLY mount of that manifest version: every write returns EROFS.
         A pinned URI MUST be refused for a realtime region (a realtime
         region has no linear version; EXT-28 Section 3.7).
      o  The credential comes from the local profile keyed by the URI's
         authority (EXT-32 Section 3.6, connection-address amendment),
         or from the environment the reference CLI resolves; it MUST
         NEVER come from the URI, and the mount MUST refuse a URI whose
         authority carries userinfo or whose query carries a credential-
         shaped key.  A capability-signed (shareable) URI is a READ grant
         and, when EXT-35 is ratified and advertised, MAY mount read-only
         under the grant's scope; until then it is refused as a mount
         target.
      o  A "<prefix>/" NARROWS the mount: only entries under the prefix
         are presented, paths are rebased to the mountpoint, and every
         write is expressed with the prefix restored.  Narrowing is a
         convenience, NOT confinement: confinement is the token's EXT-27
         read scope and the space.
      o  A space name given without a scheme is accepted by the
         reference CLI as shorthand for the profile's authority; it is
         resolved to the URI form before anything else happens.

   5.2.  Pre-flight before the kernel.

      A mount MUST complete, BEFORE the mountpoint is attached to the
      kernel: (a) a health read confirming the daemon speaks "acp/1" and
      collecting its capability set; (b) a credential check (an
      authenticated read) so a bad token fails at the command line, not
      as EIO on the first "ls"; (c) the mode lookup of EXT-31 for the
      region (GET /v1/space/config) to select the backend; (d) the
      mountpoint checks: it exists, is a directory, is EMPTY, and is not
      already a mount.  A mount whose pre-flight fails MUST exit non-
      zero with the reason and MUST leave no mountpoint behind.  A mount
      that lacks the backend a region needs (a read-only increment asked
      to mount a realtime region) MUST refuse at pre-flight, naming the
      surface to use instead, never attach and then fail per-call.

   5.3.  Backend selection by mode; mode change under a live mount.

      The view has two backends over one interface, selected by the
      region's fs_mode:

      o  CAS backend: structure = the manifest (ACP/1 Section 11);
         directories are SYNTHESISED from paths; reads by blob hash;
         writes = blobs + ONE commit under base_version; conflicts by
         the per-path anchor (Section 8).
      o  REALTIME backend: structure = the EXT-28 tree (GET /v1/fs/tree,
         narrowed to the prefix); directories are REAL nodes (empty
         directories persist); file content is a blob reference or a
         live document; writes = blobs + ONE structural batch (POST
         /v1/fs/ops) or document operations; structure never conflicts,
         content is anchored on node id (Section 8.4).

      A mount MUST follow the event log (Section 8 of ACP/1; EXT-22 when
      advertised) for fs.mode.changed.  On a mode change under a live
      mount, or on a 409 wrong_fs_mode from the barrier (EXT-31 Section
      4.5), the mount MUST: re-read the mode; invalidate its held
      structure ONCE; re-point the backend; and CARRY every pending
      change with its ORIGINAL anchor to the new surface -- never drop a
      pending change, never re-anchor it to what the new surface now
      shows (that would launder a conflict into a silent overwrite).  A
      barrier that failed with wrong_fs_mode wrote nothing, so the retry
      on the right surface is safe; if the retry fails, its own errno is
      returned.

   5.4.  The barrier and the single write path.

      All mutation is BUFFERED in the overlay as whole-file images keyed
      by path (plus structural intents: mkdir, unlink, rmdir, rename)
      and converted to acp/1 writes ONLY by the barrier:

      o  CAS: upload each NEW byte set (POST /v1/blobs, idempotent,
         content-addressed; a rename re-references the existing hash and
         uploads nothing) then ONE POST /v1/commit {base_version,
         changes} carrying every buffered change.  409 -> per-path anchor
         reconcile: the disjoint subset is rebased and re-tried; a
         conflicting path is surfaced (Section 8).  423 (lease held) ->
         the batch is KEPT and EACCES returned.
      o  REALTIME: upload each new byte set, then ONE POST /v1/fs/ops
         batch (mkdir/create/move/delete in buffer order; a content
         replace of a blob-backed file is "delete p + create p <blob>"
         anchored on the node id seen at buffer time; a pre-flight tree
         re-read; a post-batch trash re-read and REPAIR batch for a
         time-of-check race, EXT-28 style).  Structure never returns
         409.  403 bulk_denied and 428 are surfaced per Section 9.1.

      The barrier is invoked by fsync/fsyncdir, by flush on every close
      of a handle that dirtied a path, and by release of the last handle
      still dirty (the PRIMARY barrier for programs that never fsync).
      A size cap on the pending buffer MAY auto-invoke it.  Two handles
      on one path share the buffered image (POSIX-consistent within one
      mount).  This ONE path is what lets EXT-34 Section 5.5, the
      conflict anchor and the lease refusal cover every syscall.

   5.5.  The handle model (close-to-open).

      A file handle carries (path, the HANDLE PIN bound at open, a dirty
      flag, the open flags).  Reads through a handle serve the pinned
      content for the handle's life even as the tree changes underneath
      -- an editor with a file open keeps reading the bytes it opened; a
      FRESH open sees the current content.  A handle on a live document
      reads the document's current text and, on write, buffers text
      whose barrier is "pull the document's operations, diff, push".

   5.6.  Lifecycle.

      A mount runs in the FOREGROUND by default and unmounts on SIGINT,
      SIGTERM and context cancellation; "--daemon" detaches (with a log
      file).  A mount MUST clean up a STALE mountpoint it finds at start
      (a previous instance hard-killed leaves a mountpoint answering
      ENOTCONN), MUST unmount on a recovered panic, and MUST document the
      kernel's abort control for a wedged connection.  An "umount"
      verb MUST work from another shell after a hard kill (the
      privileged and the lazy fallbacks in order).  "allow_other" (other
      users may traverse the mount) MUST be OFF by default and behind an
      explicit flag.


6.  VFS Operation to ACP Mapping

   6.1.  The mapping table (CAS and realtime).

      The table states, per kernel operation, what the view does, what
      acp/1 request each backend issues, and the KERNEL-CACHE POSTURE
      (Section 7) the mount MUST return.  "deferred" = buffered in the
      overlay until the barrier.  "TTL" = the entry/attribute lifetime
      handed to the kernel; "notify" = an event-driven invalidation
      where the platform supports it.

      lookup          View.Stat via the overlay.  CAS: held manifest
                      (GET /v1/manifest only on invalidation).  RT: held
                      tree (GET /v1/fs/tree on invalidation).  Cache:
                      present and clean -> TTL about 1 s; pending, in-
                      flight or dirty -> TTL 0; MISSING -> ENOENT with
                      TTL 0 (never a cached negative).
      getattr         As lookup.  CAS: size, mtime, hash from the entry.
                      RT: size from the blob, or the current document
                      length for a live document; NO mtime exists, so
                      one is SYNTHESISED (Section 8.4).  Size MUST
                      include buffered bytes.
      readdir /       View.Readdir merged with the overlay; CAS
      readdirplus     synthesises directories; RT narrows the tree to
                      the prefix and directory; a name-collision loser
                      "<name>~<nodeId>" is shown VERBATIM and a real "~"
                      is un-doubled for display (EXT-28 Section 4.2.4).
                      One fresh directory stream per opendir = a
                      consistent listing; no cached directory stream.
      open (read)     Resolve (path -> hash | doc), bind the HANDLE PIN.
                      No wire.  No kernel page cache kept across opens
                      (close-to-open).
      read            Serve from the pin.  CAS/RT blob: GET /v1/blobs/
                      <hash> -- immutable, cached by hash, streamed above
                      a ceiling never held whole.  RT live document: the
                      document text, re-read per open, never cached.
      create /        View.WriteFile(path, empty) into the overlay;
      open(O_CREAT)   O_EXCL -> EEXIST if the OVERLAY says present (never
                      a wire probe).  Deferred.  TTL 0 while pending.
      write           Update the whole-file image at offset; the FIRST
                      partial write pulls the pinned blob into the buffer
                      (read-modify-write); O_APPEND appends at the
                      buffered size.  Above the whole-file cap -> EFBIG.
                      Deferred.  attr TTL 0.
      truncate /      Resize the buffered image.  Deferred.  attr TTL 0.
      setattr(size)
      setattr(mode/   ACCEPT-AND-DROP (cosmetic) so "cp -p", "rsync -a",
      uid/gid/times)  "tar -x" and editors do not fail (Section 6.3).
      fsync /         THE BARRIER (Section 5.4).  On success, Linux:
      fsyncdir        notify the touched names; attributes refreshed.
      flush (close)   If the handle dirtied a path -> the barrier; else
                      no-op.
      release         If still dirty (no fsync/flush landed) -> the
                      barrier; drop the pin.  The kernel IGNORES this
                      call's return value (Section 8.1).
      unlink          BULK GUARD FIRST (Section 9.1): the crossing call
                      -> EPERM synchronously, nothing bulk buffered.
                      Else View.Unlink into the overlay (a path whose put
                      is in flight becomes a real delete, never ENOENT).
                      CAS: deferred -> commit changes[{path, delete}].
                      RT: deferred -> a delete op (node -> TRASH,
                      recoverable).  Linux: notify-delete after landing.
      rmdir           ENOTEMPTY if the overlay shows effective children;
                      else CAS: drop the virtual directory; RT: a delete
                      op on the folder node.
      mkdir           CAS: a VIRTUAL directory (materialises when a file
                      lands under it; vanishes on remount if empty).  RT:
                      deferred -> a mkdir op (real, persists).  TTL 0
                      while virtual/pending.
      rename          BULK GUARD (a directory rename measures net-loss 0
                      -- EXT-34 Section 4.2.2; moving a tree is not
                      bulk).  RENAME_NOREPLACE -> EEXIST against the
                      overlay.  RENAME_EXCHANGE -> ENOTSUP (reject, never
                      ignore).  CAS: deferred -> one commit: delete old +
                      put the SAME hash at new (no re-upload).  RT:
                      deferred -> a move/rename op (identity-preserving).
                      The mount's inode object moves with the name.
                      Linux: notify both names after landing.
      link            ENOTSUP (content is shared by hash; identity is
                      not).
      symlink /       ENOTSUP (no wire type).
      readlink
      mknod / fifo /  ENOTSUP.
      socket
      xattr (all)     ENOSYS with the substrate's "disable xattrs" so the
                      kernel stops asking (v1).  A later read-only
                      "user.acp.*" namespace is an Open Question.
      access          OK: there is no per-user permission model; access
                      IS the mount's credential plus its EXT-27 read
                      scope.
      statfs          Synthetic: block size 4096; blocks/free from the
                      space quota headroom in /v1/stats when present
                      (cached at least 30 s), else large constants.  "df"
                      MUST not error.
      getlk / setlk   Not implemented; the kernel's LOCAL emulation
                      applies (Section 6.3).  Cross-agent exclusion is a
                      LEASE (ACP/1 Section 10), on the CLI/SDK surface.
      poll / ioctl /  ENOSYS / ENOTSUP.
      bmap / fallocate
      / copy_file_range
      inotify (kernel Driven by the event follower: file.* (CAS) or fs.*
      side)           (RT) events -> notify-entry / notify-delete (Linux
                      only); macOS: TTL expiry only.
      mode change     Section 5.3 (invalidate once, re-point, carry the
      under the mount batch with anchors).

      Invariant: there is no operation in this table that reaches the
      daemon by any write other than ONE commit or ONE structural batch
      (Section 5.4).

   6.2.  The errno table.

      A mount MUST use these meanings and MUST NOT conflate them; an
      agent or tool reading an errno is entitled to the cause:

         ESTALE    the version you edited is stale -- a CONTENT
                   CONFLICT, under the "error" policy only (Section
                   8.2).  POSIX-defined; editors treat it as "reload",
                   not as a disk fault.
         EACCES    refused by a LEASE (423) or by the token's
                   authorisation; the batch is kept pending; the holder
                   is named in the status surface.
         EPERM     POLICY refusal: the crossing unlink/rename of the bulk
                   guard (Section 9.1); a 428/403 answered at the
                   barrier (buffer kept); a refused Finder-metadata name
                   on macOS (Section 12.6).
         EROFS     a version-pinned ("v=") mount, or a read-only
                   increment.
         EIO       the WIRE or the daemon is unreachable, or a per-
                   request deadline expired.  NEVER a conflict, NEVER a
                   policy refusal, NEVER a lease -- EIO hides the cause
                   behind "disk error".
         ENOTSUP / an operation this memo does not map (link, symlink,
         ENOSYS    mknod, exchange-rename, xattr, fallocate, ...);
                   rejected, never silently dropped.
         EFBIG     a write that would exceed the whole-file cap (Section
                   6.3); reads still stream.
         ENODEV    a shared writable mapping under the direct-I/O
                   posture (Section 7.4), on kernels whose substrate
                   does not negotiate direct-I/O mmap.
         EEXIST / ENOENT / ENOTDIR / EISDIR / ENOTEMPTY
                   computed from the OVERLAY plus the held structure --
                   NEVER by probing the wire per call, and never from a
                   cached negative.
         ENOTCONN  a mountpoint whose mount process has died (kernel-
                   generated); the remedy is "umount" then re-mount.

   6.3.  Operations that do not map cleanly (honest degradation).

      A content-addressed, whole-file store is not a byte-addressable
      block device, and the memo says so per concern rather than
      pretending:

      o  PARTIAL / RANDOM WRITES.  The write model is a whole-file image:
         the first partial write pulls the pinned blob into the buffer,
         edits happen in memory, the barrier uploads the whole new byte
         set.  A one-byte edit re-uploads the file.  Files above a
         configurable cap (RECOMMENDED default 256 MiB) are READ-ONLY
         through the mount: a write returns EFBIG; reads stream.
      o  MMAP.  Read-only and private mappings work (executables, "git").
         A shared writable mapping is best-effort at best: its dirty
         pages arrive as writes at msync/munmap and land in the buffer,
         with no ordering guarantee against an explicit fsync on another
         handle; under the direct-I/O posture of Section 7.4 it is
         refused (ENODEV) on kernels that cannot map direct-I/O files.
         Not coherent across mounts, ever.
      o  LOCKS.  Byte-range and whole-file locks are kernel-LOCAL
         emulation: they exclude processes on THIS mount only.  Cross-
         agent exclusion is an ACP lease (an Open Question records a
         possible lock-to-lease bridge).
      o  O_APPEND.  The kernel computes the offset from the mount's size
         attribute (TTL 0 on dirty paths) and the append lands in the
         buffer.  Two mounts appending concurrently produce a CAS
         conflict (sidecar) or, in realtime, a content conflict -- NEVER
         an interleaved merge.
      o  ATOMIC RENAME.  Atomic within THIS mount's overlay and atomic at
         the authority (one commit / one batch); other mounts see it
         after event latency plus TTL.  RENAME_NOREPLACE is honoured
         against the overlay; a time-of-check race with another writer
         becomes a conflict at the barrier.  RENAME_EXCHANGE is refused.
      o  PERMISSIONS / OWNERSHIP.  Synthetic 0644 files and 0755
         directories owned by the mounting user; mode/owner/time changes
         are accepted and dropped so common tools do not fail.  Mode bits
         are cosmetic; ACCESS CONTROL IS ACP'S, not POSIX's.
      o  INODE NUMBERS.  Mount-local, stable within a mount session,
         preserved across the mount's own rename and across a realtime
         content replace (the node id changes underneath and is exposed
         as metadata, not as the inode); the generation bumps on re-
         create after delete.  Not stable across mounts.
      o  MTIME IN REALTIME.  The tree carries none; the mount synthesises
         one that CHANGES when the node id or blob changes and is
         monotonic per path, so "make" rebuilds; "ls -l" times are
         approximate.
      o  EMPTY DIRECTORIES IN CAS.  A mount-local courtesy: virtual until
         a file lands, gone on remount if still empty.  Realtime keeps
         them.
      o  EXTENDED ATTRIBUTES / FINDER METADATA.  Not stored (Section
         12.6).
      o  CASE / NORMALISATION.  Paths are byte-exact (the ACP path
         charset); no case folding; a macOS user may meet NFD/NFC
         surprises.
      o  DISCONNECTED.  Cached reads serve; an uncached read returns EIO
         FAST; a barrier fails and its bytes stay pending; there is NO
         offline write queue (Section 9.4).
      o  BULK DELETE.  "rm -rf" beyond the space's threshold stops at the
         first refused unlink unless the mount was opened with
         "--allow-bulk" (Section 9.1).


7.  The Cache-Honesty Invariant (the negative-cache hazard, generalised)

   7.1.  The invariant.

      The shipped client facade had ONE cache (its overlay) and one lie
      window (an in-flight batch invisible to same-mount reads: "you
      told me it doesn't exist, now it does").  A kernel adds FOUR
      caches -- the dentry cache including NEGATIVE dentries, the
      attribute cache, the page cache, and the directory stream -- and
      on some platforms removes the lever to invalidate them.  The
      lesson is not "negative lookups"; it is:

         EVERY cache between the user and the authority MUST either be
         invalidated by the same events that change the truth, or hold
         its entries so briefly that a lie cannot stick.  A cache MAY be
         STALE; it MUST NEVER LIE.  A NEGATIVE answer is NEVER cached.

      "Lie" is defined precisely: a negative answer for a name that
      exists at the authority or in the overlay; a positive answer with
      a size or content that mixes two versions; a directory listing
      that omits a present entry for longer than the stated bound.
      "Stale" is a positive answer that was true and is now superseded,
      within the stated bound.

   7.2.  The rules.

      A conformant mount MUST implement, and its suite MUST pin, each
      rule; the platform columns state where the KERNEL can be made to
      obey and where only the view can:

      D1  The overlay = pending UNION every queued or in-flight batch,
          newest wins; a path whose first write is in flight is PRESENT
          to lookup, readdir, stat, open, unlink and rename.  (Holds on
          every platform -- the ONE line a loopback client cannot
          break.)
      D2  A missing name is answered ENOENT with an entry lifetime of
          ZERO, and the substrate's global negative lifetime is ZERO.  No
          cached negative, ever, in the kernel or in the view: the view
          re-fetches before saying ENOENT from a snapshot it knows to be
          stale.  (Linux, macOS FUSE: enforced.  A loopback NFS client
          applies its own lookup cache -> the mount line MUST document
          the positive-only lookup-cache option.)
      D3  A pending, in-flight or dirty path carries entry and attribute
          lifetime ZERO, and its size is the buffered size.  (A loopback
          NFS client may show a stale size for its attribute timeout --
          documented.)
      D4  A clean path carries a SHORT positive lifetime (RECOMMENDED
          about 1 s, operator-tunable) AND, where the platform supports
          it, an event-driven invalidation on every file.* / fs.* event
          that touches it.  (Linux: lifetime AND notify.  macOS FUSE:
          lifetime ONLY.  Loopbacks: the OS client's cache.)
      D5  No kernel page cache kept across opens, no writeback cache, no
          cached directory stream: pages and listings die with the open.
          (Enforced on native front-ends; a loopback client caches by
          its own rules.)
      D6  The barrier is the ONLY visibility fence for OTHER mounts; for
          THIS mount the overlay makes a write visible immediately.
      D7  A kernel request MUST NEVER block on an unbounded wire wait: a
          disconnected mount answers EIO fast (Section 9.4).  (Loopback
          NFS: the client's soft/timeout options, documented.)
      D8  The per-platform staleness bound is SHOWN in the status
          surface: "cache": {"negative": 0, "entry": "<d>", "notify":
          true|false} (Appendix A).

   7.3.  The per-platform honesty bound, and where it is shown.

      Stated for the owner and the user alike: on LINUX the mount is as
      honest as the facade -- a teammate's change is visible on the
      event, and no cached answer outlives it.  On macOS through the
      FUSE package a teammate's change is visible within the positive
      lifetime plus event latency, with no push invalidation.  On a
      loopback front-end the bound is the OS client's cache, not the
      mount's.  The negative-cache CLASS (a stale "does not exist") is
      closed on EVERY platform by D1 and D2, because the kernel is never
      told a name is absent for longer than the current call.  The
      mount MUST print its platform's bound at mount time and MUST show
      it in the status surface (D8).

   7.4.  Page-cache posture (recorded deviation).

      The design table (Section 6.1) says "no kernel page cache across
      opens" and the spike said "no direct I/O, it would break mmap".
      The first increment found, with a real-kernel test, that the
      page-cache alternative LIES: a file rewritten upstream is read
      TRUNCATED to the kernel's cached old size for up to the attribute
      lifetime -- a mixed-version read, the exact thing 7.1 forbids.
      The reference mount therefore returns DIRECT I/O on every file
      handle: each handle is one coherent content version, reads are
      bounded by the handle's own end-of-file, and no page can go stale.
      Cost: no kernel page cache (bytes come from the in-process cache),
      and a shared writable mapping is refused (ENODEV) where the
      substrate cannot negotiate direct-I/O mmap; private mappings work.
      This is a DEVIATION from the design table, recorded for the owner
      to ratify or reverse; the live-follow increment (Section 16, slice
      4) re-evaluates it, because precise invalidation events make
      "attribute lifetime zero plus content invalidation" a viable page-
      cache design.  Whichever posture is chosen, 7.1 is the test: a
      fresh open MUST see the full new bytes, never a truncated mix.


8.  Conflict Through POSIX

   8.1.  errno is one integer; the conflict record is not.

      A barrier's outcome is a REPORT: {version, landed[], conflicts[]:
      {path, op, ours{hash, bytes}, theirs{hash, size, mtime}, sidecar,
      theirsNode}, rebases, attempts, outstamped[]}.  A kernel can
      return exactly ONE errno from fsync, flush or release -- and the
      kernel DISCARDS release's return value.  Consequently: a conflict
      discovered on release (the common case -- "cp", "git checkout", a
      build tool, none of which fsync) cannot be reported by errno at
      all; an errno on fsync reaches the PROCESS, not the human ("fsync
      failed" in an editor's status line, which keeps its buffer but
      learns nothing of WHAT conflicted); and the losing bytes must
      exist somewhere findable, which errno cannot provide.  Hence the
      two-part answer: a policy for the errno, and a MANDATORY status
      surface for the record.

   8.2.  The two policies.

      SIDECAR (the DEFAULT; the shipped facade's default):  the disjoint
         subset lands; each conflicting write lands as a SIDECAR
         "<name>.conflict-<agent>-<timestamp>" -- a FRESH name, never
         overwriting an existing one, including one that exists but is
         invisible to the token's read scope (the naming hazard under
         EXT-27, HZ-ACPDB-14); the path keeps THEIR bytes.  fsync/flush
         return 0 (the write DID durably land, as a sidecar).  The editor
         then sees the file change under it -- Linux: notify on the path
         and the new sibling, so inotify users and editors prompt
         "reload?"; macOS: on the next stat after the lifetime.  Both
         byte sets are on the daemon.
      ERROR (opt-in "--conflict=error"; the facade's "throw" policy):
         the disjoint subset lands; the conflicting change stays PENDING
         in the mount; fsync/flush return ESTALE.  The editor keeps its
         dirty buffer; a second save meets the same conflict until the
         user re-reads (re-open).  Ours exist ONLY in the mount buffer --
         lost if the mount dies -- which is why this is not the default.
         On release the errno is lost, so the record MUST still reach
         the status surface.

      Under BOTH policies: a lease refusal (423) -> EACCES with the batch
      kept and the holder in the status surface; a pinned mount -> EROFS
      on any write; a bulk refusal -> EPERM (Section 9.1); a disconnected
      barrier -> EIO with bytes pending; a mode flipped underneath ->
      0 after re-point and retry (Section 5.3).  NEVER EIO for a
      conflict.

   8.3.  The status surface.

      Required under both policies, layered:

      (1) A STRUCTURED LOG (stderr or "--log"): one JSON line per barrier
          report and per conflict record -- always on; what an agent
          harness tails.
      (2) A CONTROL DIRECTORY "<mountpoint>/.acp/" (flag "--control-dir";
          RECOMMENDED on for an interactive mount, off for "--daemon"):
          READ-ONLY synthetic files -- "status" (Appendix A), "conflicts.
          jsonl" (append-only for the session, every conflict record
          including the sidecar name and the other writer's node), and
          "trash" (realtime: the retained trash listing in scope, so a
          user can see what an "rm" moved aside and restore it with the
          CLI's restore verb).  The directory is EXCLUDED from readdir of
          the root unless the flag is set, so "rsync", "git" and "find"
          never see it by accident, and it is never written to the
          daemon.
      (3) On Linux, an inotify event for every landed sidecar
          (create/delete semantics through notify), so editors and
          "inotifywait" learn of it without polling.
      (4) OPTIONAL, later: a read-only "user.acp.conflict" extended
          attribute on the original path while a sidecar exists
          (deferred; v1 disables xattrs).

   8.4.  Realtime through POSIX.

      o  STRUCTURE never conflicts.  Two mounts creating, moving or
         deleting in one subtree both land; a moved file keeps its node
         id; a same-name concurrent create keeps BOTH nodes and the loser
         appears as "<name>~<nodeId>" -- a real, listable, openable path
         (EXT-28 Section 4.2.4).  The mount MUST show it verbatim and
         MUST NOT "clean" it (that would hide the daemon's name for that
         node); a "~" in a user-typed name is doubled on the wire and un-
         doubled for display; a loser's suffix is accepted verbatim on
         input.
      o  CONTENT is still anchored.  Replacing a blob-backed file is
         "delete p + create p <blob>" in ONE batch, anchored on the node
         id the mount saw at buffer time; a different or absent node at
         the barrier is a conflict surfaced exactly as Section 8.2, plus
         the repair batch (their node restored from trash, ours to the
         sidecar).  A LIVE DOCUMENT file MERGES -- no anchor, no
         conflict, convergence.
      o  A DELETE IS A MOVE TO TRASH.  "rm f" trashes the node
         (recoverable for the retention window; EXT-28 Section 4.4 --
         "delete is not immediate erasure", HZ-ACPDB-28); the mount
         answers ENOENT afterwards; ".acp/trash" and the CLI list it.
      o  readdir is a snapshot per opendir merged with the overlay.  A
         teammate's change between two "ls" calls shows on the second
         once the fs.* event has marked the tree stale: event latency
         with a follower, the positive lifetime plus the next re-read
         without one -- the bound is stated in the docs and in D8.
      o  An editor with a file open keeps the pinned bytes; on Linux it
         receives a delete/create pair (same mount-local inode) and
         prompts to reload; on macOS it notices at the next stat.
      o  "make" sees the synthesised, monotonic mtime (Section 6.3).
      o  The version is null; ".acp/status" shows {"version": null,
         "mode": "realtime"}; a "v="-pinned URI refuses to mount a
         realtime region.
      o  fs.mode.changed -> Section 5.3.


9.  Safety Under the Mount

   9.1.  The bulk guard, measured at the crossing unlink.

      EXT-34 Section 5.5 already binds a mount; this memo restates it as
      the mount's contract.  A mount cannot ask its user, so it MUST
      evaluate EXT-34 Section 4.2 LOCALLY -- the net-loss tallies over
      (overlay UNION the operation) against the token's measurement
      scope -- BEFORE acknowledging the unlink, rmdir or rename that
      would make the pending batch bulk, and MUST fail THAT call with
      EPERM so an "rm -rf" stops at the first refused unlink having
      buffered NOTHING bulk.  A directory rename is delete plus re-add of
      the same hashes and measures 0: moving a tree is not bulk.  Only a
      mount created with the explicit "--allow-bulk" option forwards a
      bulk_confirm computed from ITS OWN measurement (never a blind echo
      of the authority's numbers).  If the authority nonetheless answers
      428 or 403 bulk_denied at the barrier (the cache was stale; the
      token is denied bulk), the mount MUST keep the buffered changes
      (never drop an acknowledged write), surface the refusal through
      the status surface, return EPERM, and MUST NOT auto-echo.  Where
      the daemon exposes the token's disposition (EXT-34 whoami), a mount
      SHOULD read it at pre-flight and warn before a large operation.
      The mount-side guard works on the FROZEN wire -- it does not depend
      on the daemon advertising "bulkguard"; when the daemon does, the
      two measurements agree by construction (same rule, same scope).
      A mount opened with "--allow-bulk" is trusted by design; its
      recovery is EXT-33 history.

   9.2.  Recover from anything under the mount.

      Every destructive change from the mount is recoverable for the
      space's retention window exactly as from any other client, because
      the mount uses no other write path: a CAS commit is a version with
      an EXT-33 record (a restore is a forward commit); a realtime delete
      is a move to retained TRASH (EXT-28 Section 5.6, a RESTORE brings
      it back with identity and content); an accepted bulk commit pins
      an EXT-34 pre-bulk checkpoint.  A mount MUST expose what it moved
      aside (".acp/trash" in realtime; the sidecar in the tree for a
      conflict) and MUST NOT implement any delete that bypasses these.

   9.3.  No second write path; no durable authority state.

      The mount holds NO durable authority state: its buffer is
      volatile, its caches are derived, its status files are synthetic.
      Everything durable is on the daemon.  A mount MUST NOT persist a
      write queue across its own restart (that would be an offline store
      with its own conflict semantics -- a non-goal), and MUST report an
      unflushed buffer at exit in its log so nothing is lost silently.

   9.4.  Never block; the disconnected posture.

      A hung filesystem hangs every program that touches it.  A mount
      MUST bound every kernel request by a per-request deadline and MUST
      NOT wait on the wire without one: disconnected, an uncached read
      returns EIO FAST (never fabricated bytes, never a block); a barrier
      fails with EIO and its bytes stay pending; the status surface says
      "disconnected"; reconnect resumes the event follower from the last
      seq plus one with no gap.  There is NO offline write queue in v1
      (whether realtime structural ops may queue until reconnect is an
      Open Question).


10. Platform Reach

   The reach table (normative for what a mount MUST claim; each row's
   "honesty" is the Section 7.3 bound):

   Linux desktop / server (kernel FUSE, the standard FUSE userspace
      package): native, PRIMARY; nothing to install beyond the package;
      honesty FULL (lifetime and notify).
   Linux container / CI sandbox: native ONLY with the FUSE device and
      the mount privilege (or root in a user namespace) and any policy
      allowance -- the orchestrator's cooperation; honesty full when it
      works.  There is NO fallback that yields a POSIX mountpoint without
      the same privilege (userspace WebDAV/NFS clients on Linux are
      themselves FUSE- or privilege-backed).  Honest answer: the SDK and
      CLI; no mountpoint.
   macOS 12+ with the user-installed FUSE package (kernel extension, or
      its file-system-extension backend on newer releases): native;
      the package MUST NOT be bundled (licence); the kernel-extension
      path needs the user's reduced-security approval on recent
      hardware; honesty LIFETIME ONLY (no notify).  Fallback: the
      loopback NFS server.
   macOS with a kext-less third-party FUSE shim: NOT supported for a
      live tree (it ignores cache lifetimes and offers no notify); a
      user MAY find it works; the mount MUST NOT claim it.
   macOS locked-down (no kernel extension, no install rights):
      LOOPBACK NFSv3 -- the mount runs a loopback NFS server bound to
      127.0.0.1 on a random port and the built-in kernel client mounts
      it (user-mountable; locks disabled; positive-only lookup cache;
      soft with a timeout); honesty = the OS client's attribute cache.
      Windows-style WebDAV via Finder is a further fallback (needs lock
      support and metadata handling).
   Windows 10/11: no kernel FUSE.  LOOPBACK WebDAV over loopback HTTPS
      with a random per-session credential (built into every edition);
      caveats: a default 50 MB file cap (registry-tunable), a per-
      directory attribute budget, basic auth only over TLS.  The built-
      in NFS client exists only on the professional editions and is not
      the primary path.  No third-party FUSE stack (Section 4.4).
   FreeBSD: best-effort native (the substrate tests it); honesty
      unverified; NFS loopback as fallback.
   Browser: not this memo -- the browser virtual filesystem epic.

   Both loopbacks are SERVERS the OS's own client mounts, sitting on the
   same view; they are dependency-free of third-party kernel code and
   MUST obey Section 12.2.  Their fidelity is lower (no change
   notification on either; WebDAV listing storms; the Windows caps) and
   MUST be stated as such.


11. Honest Limits

   Stated because they are the trust:

   o  Conflicts through errno are lossy (Section 8.1); the full record
      is in the sidecar and the status surface.
   o  Content is immutable per node in realtime and whole-file in CAS:
      an in-place partial rewrite is a replace underneath; a one-byte
      edit re-uploads the file; very large files are read-only through
      the mount (EFBIG).
   o  Platform reach differs (Section 10): Linux full; macOS lifetime-
      only or loopback; Windows loopback WebDAV; a locked-down host gets
      no mountpoint.
   o  It is a running mount: a process holds it; if the process dies the
      mountpoint answers ENOTCONN until unmounted; the data is safe on
      the daemon; re-mount.
   o  Locks are per mount; cross-agent exclusion is a lease.
   o  No offline writes.
   o  Directory listings and attributes on a loopback front-end obey the
      OS client's cache, not the mount's.
   o  Nothing here reaches the non-file primitives (mailbox, leases,
      presence, channels); those stay on the MCP, CLI and SDK surfaces.


12. Security Considerations

   12.1.  No token in a path, argument, option or listener.  The ACP
      bearer or space token MUST NEVER appear in the mount URI (EXT-32's
      ironclad rule), in a mounted file, in a mount option visible to
      "mount" or "/proc", in the process argument vector beyond the
      "acp://" address, or on any loopback listener.  The token rides
      ONLY the Authorization header of the mount's own acp/1 requests.
      A mount MUST refuse a URI carrying userinfo or a credential-shaped
      query key.  The suite MUST assert, at the request level, that no
      Authorization header ever appears on a loopback listener and no
      token appears in any file under the mountpoint.

   12.2.  Mount-local secrets for the loopbacks.  A loopback server MUST
      bind ONLY to 127.0.0.1, and MUST authenticate the OS client with a
      credential the mount MINTED for this session (a random basic-auth
      secret for WebDAV over loopback TLS; loopback-only binding plus a
      random high port for NFSv3, which has no credential) -- NEVER the
      ACP token.  A leak of the session secret exposes only that
      session's view for that session's life; a leak of the ACP token
      would be the capability-URL leak class (EXT-3), a P0.  The
      loopback libraries are not hardened against hostile clients, which
      is acceptable ONLY under this binding and credential rule.

   12.3.  Access is the credential's, not POSIX's.  Mode bits are
      cosmetic (Section 6.3).  What a mount can read is the token's
      EXT-27 read scope: an out-of-scope subtree is MISSING-SHAPED
      (never an error), in-scope counts are filtered counts, and the
      status surface MUST NOT reveal out-of-scope names, sizes or counts
      (the no-oracle discipline applies to ".acp/trash" and to any
      count it prints).  What a mount can write is the token's write
      scope and bulk disposition.

   12.4.  Other users on the host.  "allow_other" is OFF by default: a
      mount is visible to the mounting user only, because the mount's
      credential would otherwise act on behalf of any local user.
      Enabling it is an explicit, documented flag.

   12.5.  The status surface discloses.  ".acp/" carries the daemon
      address, the mode, pending paths and conflict records (including
      another writer's agent id).  It is hidden from root readdir by
      default, is read-only, never leaves the host, and is never written
      to the daemon; a mount with a read-scoped token MUST apply 12.3 to
      it.

   12.6.  Host-metadata litter.  A macOS file browser drops AppleDouble
      ("._*") and folder-settings files into any directory it touches; a
      shared space would accumulate them from every Mac.  A mount on
      macOS SHOULD refuse names beginning "._" with EPERM by default
      (flag to allow), and the memo records ignoring folder-settings
      writes as an Open Question.

   12.7.  Sidecar naming under read scope.  A sidecar name MUST be fresh
      against the AUTHORITY's view, not only the token's: an existing
      but out-of-scope sibling must not be overwritten (HZ-ACPDB-14).

   12.8.  The space is the boundary.  A mount presents ONE region of ONE
      space; it confers no cross-space reach and cannot be re-pointed by
      a path, query or option to another space (EXT-32 Section 3.10).
      Prefix narrowing is hygiene, not confinement.


13. Interaction with Other Extensions

   13.1.  EXT-28 (CRDT directory tree).  The realtime backend consumes
      GET /v1/fs/tree, POST /v1/fs/ops, GET /v1/fs/trash and RESTORE as
      specified; it shows loser names verbatim, keeps content anchored on
      node id, and exposes trash recovery through ".acp/trash" and the
      CLI (discharging EXT-28 Section 5.6's "client SHOULD expose it").
      The mount adds no structural semantics: convergence, sticky trash,
      no-resurrection and the GC pin are the daemon's.

   13.2.  EXT-31 (filesystem mode).  Backend selection by GET /v1/space/
      config; wrong_fs_mode and fs.mode.changed handling per Section 5.3
      (the mount is the "virtual-FS facade" EXT-31 Section 4.5 assumes).
      A pinned URI refuses a realtime region.

   13.3.  EXT-32 ("acp://").  The mount target is a connection address
      plus an optional collection path; the ironclad rule is inherited.
      The reference CLI's "mount" verb resolves the profile from the
      authority exactly as "--uri" does.

   13.4.  EXT-33 (history).  "v=" pins a read-only mount; a CAS commit
      from the mount is an ordinary versioned commit; recovery of a
      mount-caused loss is EXT-33 restore (a forward commit).

   13.5.  EXT-34 (bulk-change guard).  Section 9.1 IS EXT-34 Section
      5.5 from the mount's side; the reference-client contract lines of
      EXT-34 that name "a mount" are satisfied here.

   13.6.  EXT-27 (read scoping).  Section 12.3: missing-shaped out-of-
      scope, filtered counts, no oracle through the status surface;
      sidecar naming per 12.7.

   13.7.  EXT-22 (scoped watch).  When "watch" is advertised the event
      follower narrows to the mount's prefix; otherwise it filters
      file.* / fs.* events client-side from the full log.

   13.8.  EXT-35 (path and subtree capability URLs).  Not consumed in
      v1.  When ratified and advertised, a subtree capability MAY mount
      READ-ONLY under its signed prefix (the "link-held mount" EXT-35
      names); until then a capability-signed URI is refused as a mount
      target.

   13.9.  ACP/1 Section 10 (leases).  A 423 on the barrier is EACCES with
      the batch kept and the holder shown; the mount takes no lease of
      its own (an Open Question records a lock-to-lease bridge).


14. Capability Negotiation, Rollout and Distribution

   14.1.  The mount advertises NOTHING and requires no capability to run
      against a bare acp/1 daemon in CAS mode.  It FEATURE-DETECTS at
      pre-flight: "fsmode" + "crdtfs" (realtime regions mountable);
      "history" ("v=" pins; restore guidance); "bulkguard" (disposition
      read; server-side agreement with the local guard); "watch" (prefix-
      narrowed following); "scopedtokens.read" (scope-aware status);
      "acpuri" (bare-host discovery).  Absent any of them the mount
      degrades to the documented behaviour, never to a silent one.

   14.2.  Backward compatibility.  A mount is a client; a daemon is
      unchanged by its existence.  An older mount against a newer daemon
      ignores capabilities it does not know; a newer mount against an
      older daemon refuses at pre-flight what it cannot serve (a
      realtime region on a daemon without "crdtfs" cannot exist; a
      pinned mount on a daemon without "history" is refused with the
      reason).

   14.3.  Distribution.  The mount binary ships beside the CLI in the
      release matrix for Linux and macOS (never Windows for the native
      front-end), with a checksum per artifact; the installer resolves it
      by name; "acp update" is aware of the sibling.  The macOS FUSE
      package is never bundled.  The reference CLI's "mount" verb
      discovers the binary sibling-first then on PATH and prints an
      install message when absent.

   14.4.  The client SDK must carry the realtime surface.  A mount built
      on the public SDK can only speak realtime if the SDK exposes the
      EXT-28/31 client functions; the SDK regeneration gate precedes the
      realtime increment.


15. Section 17 Determinism Compliance

   The mount touches NOTHING in the replicated state machine.  Every
   request it issues is an existing acp/1, EXT-28 or EXT-31 request whose
   apply-path determinism is already that memo's; its local caches,
   overlay, lifetimes, synthesised times and status files are node-local
   CLIENT state that never enters a replicated computation; the loopback
   servers are client-side too.  There is no wall-clock, I/O or
   nondeterminism ADDED to any apply path by this memo, because this memo
   adds nothing to any apply path.


16. Conformance Ladder (the merge bar per increment)

   The mount is built as SHIPPABLE INCREMENTS, each with its own merge
   bar, so a later lane continues without re-deriving the design.  A
   conformant implementation MAY stop at any rung and MUST state which
   rung it reaches (a read-only mount is conformant to rung 1 and MUST
   say "read-only").  Test families are named; the clause-to-test map is
   maintained outside the memo (the ticket's conformance stub).  Every
   family's exploit-first case MUST first be shown FAILING on a naive
   adapter with the bad behaviour reproduced; real-mount tests MUST run
   against a scratch daemon on a loopback address at a temporary
   mountpoint, unmount on cleanup, and SKIP (never fake) without the FUSE
   device; nothing may touch a production daemon.

   Rung  Increment                          Merge bar (families)
   ----  ---------------------------------  ---------------------------
    1    CAS READ-ONLY mount: ls/cat/grep/  lifecycle (mount, list,
         stat/find, prefix narrowing, "v="  read, pinned = EROFS, clean
         pin, the Section 7 posture, the    unmount); cache-honesty
         CLI mount/umount shim.             (negatives never cached in
         [reference implementation EXISTS,  kernel or view; fresh open
         2026-09-18]                        sees full new bytes); cache
                                            bound; no-token; URI parity
    2    WRITE PATH (CAS): whole-file        editor save sequence lands
         buffer, ONE-commit barrier,        as one commit; rename re-
         mkdir/rm/mv, EFBIG, ENOTSUP set,   references the hash; the
         accept-and-drop attrs, TTL 0 on    in-flight-write-is-present
         pending, notify after landing.     probe (the negative-cache
                                            hazard ported); the two-
                                            mount same-path race with
                                            the loser's bytes never
                                            lost; facade conformance
                                            vectors replayed
    3    BULK GUARD + STATUS: crossing       "rm -rf" beyond threshold
         unlink -> EPERM, "--allow-bulk",   refused at the crossing
         428/403 keep the buffer,           unlink with nothing bulk
         ".acp/status".                     buffered; under threshold
                                            lands; allow-bulk forwards
                                            the mount's own count; a
                                            stale-cache 428 keeps the
                                            buffer and is not echoed;
                                            denied token gets EPERM
                                            not EIO; net-loss parity
                                            with an EXT-34 reference
    4    LIVE-FOLLOW: event follower ->     write on mount A visible on
         narrowed invalidation + Linux      mount B on the event;
         notify; reconnect; generation      inotify fires; lifetime-
         marks; page-cache posture          independence (long lifetime
         re-evaluated (Section 7.4).        set, change lands fast);
                                            disconnected posture (EIO
                                            fast, status says so,
                                            cached reads serve)
    5    CONFLICT UX: sidecar default,       both byte sets survive;
         "conflicts.jsonl", inotify on the  sidecar visible to ls; the
         sidecar, "--conflict=error" ->     no-fsync release path still
         ESTALE.                            lands the sidecar; ESTALE
                                            keeps the editor buffer;
                                            disjoint paths no false
                                            conflict; leased -> EACCES;
                                            the live-loser anchor case
    6    REALTIME backend: tree, loser      structure converges across
         names, node-id anchors,            two mounts; loser name shown
         delete+create replace, trash       verbatim; rm -> trash and
         repair batch, live documents,      restorable; document merge;
         synthesised mtime, real empty      mode flip re-points carrying
         dirs, mode re-point.               anchors; POSIX honesty
                                            family; parity with the
                                            facade's realtime vectors
    7    LIFECYCLE hardening: "--daemon",   stale mount cleaned at
         stale-mount cleanup, panic ->      start; hard-kill then umount
         unmount, "mount status", per-      works; no request blocks
         request deadlines.                 past its deadline
    8    RELEASE plumbing: build matrix,    artifact + checksum present
         installer, docs, CLI awareness.    for each target; installer
                                            resolves it; "acp update"
                                            aware
    9    macOS via the FUSE package:        manual run log per release
         lifetime-only honesty shown,       (no CI path); "._*" refused;
         "._*" refusal.                     status shows notify:false
   10    NFSv3 LOOPBACK (kext-less macOS).  loopback-only bind; no
                                            Authorization on the
                                            listener; the D1/D2 lines
                                            hold through the OS client;
                                            documented mount options
   11    WebDAV LOOPBACK (Windows).         as rung 10 plus per-session
                                            credential over loopback
                                            TLS; conditional writes
                                            carry the anchor; lock
                                            support for the OS client

   Parallelisable once rung 2 lands: 3 with 4, then 5 with 6; 7 and 8
   any time after 1.  "Done" for a rung means the kernel-free AND real-
   mount tests are green, an independent review has been folded, and a
   defect introduced by a rung is treated at the severity of what it
   broke.


17. Open Questions

   o  SHOULD A CLIENT-CONFORMANCE MEMO CARRY A NUMBER?  The owner's
      2026-09-18 statement was "no dedicated wire-ext; an epic plus a
      consumer".  This memo is drafted as EXT-37 on the EXT-23/EXT-32
      precedent (client memos with a number and a ledger row), because
      the OBLIGATIONS on a mount that EXT-28, EXT-31 and EXT-34 already
      state need a normative home and a conformance row, and because two
      implementers must agree on the sidecar convention, the status
      schema and the errno meanings.  The alternative -- an unnumbered
      epic with a client-contract appendix in EXT-31 -- is argued in the
      ticket discussion.  The recommendation is to number it as a
      CLIENT-CONFORMANCE extension (no wire, no capability) and to say
      so in the category line.  Owner decides.

   o  THE PAGE-CACHE POSTURE (Section 7.4).  Ratify the direct-I/O
      deviation of the first increment (never a truncated read; no
      shared writable mmap) until the live-follow increment re-evaluates
      a page-cache design with events in hand -- or reverse it now.
      Recommendation: keep it.

   o  THE CONTROL DIRECTORY DEFAULT.  On for interactive mounts, off for
      "--daemon" (recommended), or always off behind the flag.

   o  OFFLINE STRUCTURAL OPS IN REALTIME.  Queue mkdir/rename/delete
      until reconnect (they never conflict) or refuse as CAS does
      (recommended for v1: refuse; one posture).

   o  A LOCK-TO-LEASE BRIDGE.  Map an exclusive whole-file lock to an ACP
      lease acquisition (with the lease's TTL) so a POSIX-locking tool
      gains cross-agent exclusion.  Deferred; recorded.

   o  A READ-ONLY "user.acp.*" EXTENDED-ATTRIBUTE NAMESPACE (hash, node
      id, version, conflict flag) once xattrs are enabled for reads.

   o  MACOS FOLDER-SETTINGS FILES.  Refuse (like "._*"), accept, or
      ignore-on-write.

   o  THE WHOLE-FILE CAP DEFAULT (256 MiB recommended) and whether it is
      per mount or per space.

   o  WHETHER THE LOOPBACK NFS FRONT-END SHOULD ALSO BE OFFERED ON LINUX
      (it still needs the mount privilege, so it is a macOS story, not a
      container story).

   o  THE WINDOWS FUSE STACK: closed unless the owner buys its commercial
      licence and accepts a second FUSE stack.


Appendix A.  The Control Directory Schema

   "<mountpoint>/.acp/status" (read-only, JSON, regenerated per read):

      {
        "state":        "connected" | "disconnected" | "flushing",
        "authority":    "<host:port>",
        "space":        "<name>",
        "prefix":       "<prefix>/" | "",
        "mode":         "cas" | "realtime",
        "version":      <manifest version> | null,      ; null in realtime
        "pinned":       <version> | null,               ; "v=" mounts
        "read_only":    true | false,
        "conflict_policy": "sidecar" | "error",
        "allow_bulk":   true | false,
        "bulk_disposition": "allowed" | "denied" | "unknown",
        "last_seq":     <event seq>,
        "pending":      [ "<path>", ... ],              ; buffered, unflushed
        "in_flight":    true | false,
        "last_barrier": { "at": "<time>", "ok": true|false,
                          "version": <v>|null, "landed": <n>,
                          "conflicts": <n>, "error": "<errno name>"|null },
        "cache":        { "negative": 0, "entry": "<duration>",
                          "notify": true | false,
                          "platform": "linux-fuse" | "darwin-fuse" |
                                      "nfs-loopback" | "webdav-loopback" },
        "last_error":   "<text>" | null
      }

   "<mountpoint>/.acp/conflicts.jsonl": one JSON object per line, one
   line per conflict record of the session: {at, path, op, ours{hash,
   size}, theirs{hash, size, mtime}, sidecar, theirs_node|null, policy}.
   Append-only for the session; not persisted across restarts.

   "<mountpoint>/.acp/trash" (realtime only): the retained trash listing
   the token's scope permits -- one JSON object per line {node_id,
   origin_path, trashed_at, size}; restore is the CLI's verb.

   All three are synthetic, read-only, hidden from root readdir unless
   "--control-dir", never written to the daemon, and filtered by the
   token's read scope (Section 12.3).


Appendix B.  Worked Examples

   B.1.  An editor's save (CAS).  The editor writes ".spec.md.tmp",
      renames it over "spec.md", then fsyncs.  The overlay holds one new
      byte set and one rename; the barrier uploads ONE blob and issues
      ONE commit {delete .spec.md.tmp (never existed upstream -- elided),
      put spec.md <hash>}; the version advances by one; "stat" shows the
      new size immediately (overlay), other mounts see it on the event.

   B.2.  "rm -rf big/" beyond the threshold.  The first unlinks are
      buffered (each is below the threshold); the unlink that would make
      the pending batch cross the delete threshold returns EPERM; "rm"
      stops with "Operation not permitted"; nothing bulk was buffered
      and no wipe reached the daemon.  With "--allow-bulk" the whole
      delete lands in one commit carrying the mount's own bulk_confirm
      counts, and (where "history" is advertised) an EXT-34 pre-bulk
      checkpoint pins the prior version.

   B.3.  A same-file race (sidecar default).  Mounts A and B both edit
      "notes.md" from version 41.  A's barrier lands (42).  B's barrier
      meets 409; the anchor for "notes.md" (hash at buffer time) no
      longer matches; B's bytes land as "notes.md.conflict-B-<ts>" in a
      commit that rebases B's other, disjoint paths; fsync returns 0;
      ".acp/conflicts.jsonl" gains a record naming A's hash; on Linux an
      inotify create fires for the sidecar and B's editor prompts to
      reload "notes.md".  Both byte sets are on the daemon.

   B.4.  The same race under "--conflict=error".  B's fsync returns
      ESTALE; B's editor keeps its buffer and shows "reload?"; B's bytes
      stay pending in the mount until B re-opens the file; the record is
      in the status surface.  If the mount dies first, B's bytes are
      gone -- which is why this is opt-in.

   B.5.  A teammate's change in realtime.  Agent B (another machine)
      creates "specs/todo.md" via its own mount; the fs.* event reaches
      A's follower; A's view marks the tree stale and (Linux) notifies
      the directory entry; A's next "ls specs/" shows it.  A and B then
      append to the same live-document file; the bytes converge; neither
      sees a conflict marker or a sidecar.

   B.6.  A name-collision loser.  A and B both create "notes.md" in one
      folder concurrently in realtime; the greater stamp holds the name;
      the other node is listed as "notes.md~<nodeId>" -- openable,
      renameable with "mv" -- and the mount shows it exactly so.

   B.7.  A mode flip under a live mount.  An admin flips the space to
      realtime; the mount receives fs.mode.changed (or a 409
      wrong_fs_mode from its next barrier); it re-reads the mode,
      invalidates once, switches to the realtime backend, and re-issues
      its pending changes as a structural batch anchored on what it saw
      at buffer time; nothing pending is dropped or re-anchored.


Authors' Addresses

   A. Bot (Editor)
   ab0t
   https://ab0t.com

   This extension proposal accompanies the ACP/1 specification
   (rfc/acp-1.txt) and the reference implementation distributed at
   https://github.com/ab0t-com/acp .  It is a client-consumer memo in
   the manner of EXT-23 and EXT-32: it transcribes the Mountable-ACP
   design ratified 2026-09-18 into a client-conformance contract, adds
   no wire, and composes with ACP/1 Sections 8, 11 and 12 and with
   EXT-27, EXT-28, EXT-31, EXT-32, EXT-33 and EXT-34 by consuming the
   surfaces they expose.
